pesite 
iter: 
ere ie 
St eaten: 
bevaes< (Scie Sores aeteny ae a 
«eek 
s 
per vate 9° 
ere 
Ore Lees ea iL 
De ei ue 
rf 
i eh et See er 
ae pyeaseenaseste : Saray =apracertessec 
PRESS ORIOY ST Brae ae Ss peste in ie ite ot PSESeAbRS Se Tp sece hss estoy epias we set ER DI TE egy =i Es REGRSES VSS CEOS 3a TE ASST RE Saar 
Sy IFES 
Ei: 
2 Sass ohh 

EL CAMINO COLLEGE LIBRARY 
Tica 

DATE DUE 
WL 307 JAN € 3 Z i 
\ — a 
f 
g ie | 
CK 
FP (Se = tof 7 fe hie 
f 
sr) = ry ee] 


4 
2 
4 ; y 
‘ we 
ee ns FRANKENSTEIN 


\p oS (G . 
MARY,SHELLEY /797-/85/ 
Frankenstein 
Adapted by Dale Carlson 
Illustrated by Neil Boyle 
GOLDEN PRESS (#) NEW YORK 
EL GANiNO COLLEGE LIBRARY 

_ 3 
{ 
f 
x ' 
( 
1 
7. 
~ : 
3 
a 
LIBRARY OF CONGRESS 
ATALOG CARD NUMBER 68-9479 d ; auth N po ieee le) = 
< ; © CopyRiGHT 1968 BY DALE CARLSON. 
PRINTED IN THE U.S.A. 
BY WESTERN PUBLISHING COMPANY, INC. 

“S| CONTENTS |& 
WUMELC REATION. eet.) oe 9 
AE EGE SC AP i Gem er eae scat, owt 24 
IEIEC ION were Menten Se teee Ste nko. nes 36 
REVENGE eter Ie Pe Renee ee a 
THE-HORRIBLE TRUTH......... 4... 67 
PONGECTOM ACE nt 60: he nee 89 
THE MONSTER’S WIFE ............ 108 
THE DocTor’s WEDDING ......... 129 



8 FRANKENSTEIN 

“31 |c- 
The Creation 
It was a dark, stormy night late in November. In his 
laboratory, a tower room high over the roofs of Ingol- 
stadt, Germany, Dr. Victor Frankenstein bent over the 
huge, lifeless figure before him. It was nearly finished, 
this creature which had occupied his mind and soul for 
nearly two years. In an agony of excitement, Franken- 
stein examined his work. Finished! All that remained 
- was to infuse the spark of life into its lifeless form, to ap- 
ply his electrical instruments and make his creature live. 
Frankenstein performed his final task and waited, his © 
gaze fixed on the gigantic figure. It was already one in 
the morning; the rain battered against the window of his 
laboratory. His candle was nearly burned out, when, by 
the glimmer of its pale light, he saw the dull yellow eye 
of the creature open; it breathed hard, and a violent 
shudder shook its limbs-> 
Frankenstein stared; horrified, at this catastrophe, this 
hideous thing he had worked on so hard and taken such 

10 FRANKENSTEIN 
pains to form. The creature’s body, though huge, was in 
perfect proportion, and Frankenstein had chosen his fea- 
tures as beautiful. Beautiful! Ugh—his yellow skin barely 
covered the muscles and arteries beneath. His hair was 
thick and shiny black, his teeth of a pearly whiteness, 
but the handsome hair and teeth only made a horrid 
contrast with his watery eyes, which seemed almost the 
same color as the yellowish sockets in which they were 
set, his shriveled skin, and straight black lips. 
“Oh God!” thought Frankenstein. “How changeable 
are the feelings of human nature. Pve worked hard for 
nearly two years, for the sole purpose of infusing life into 
an inanimate body. My dream_was to prove that I had 
discovered the secret of life, to create a new race of 
beings. For this Pve gone without rest, without family 
and friends. Now I’ve finished, and I can’t bear the sight 
of him!” 
The beauty of Frankenstein’s dream had vanished. Af- 
ter one last look, filled with breathless horror and dis- 
gust, he rushed out of the laboratory to his bedroom and 
threw himself, still clothed, onto the bed. He hoped for 
seep,, for a few moments of forgetfulness. Sleep did 
come, but with it came wild, frightening dreams. 
He saw himself first as a boy, with his family, in their 
lovely Swiss home in Geneva where Frankenstein was 
born. He saw his father, a man of honor and great im- 
portance, respected by all who knew him; his mother, 
now dead, but in life, gentle and beautiful; his two 
younger brothers, Ernest and William; and Elizabeth, the 

THE CREATION 4) 
lovely Elizabeth, adopted into the Frankenstein family as 
a child and adored by them all. 
Even as a boy, Victor Frankenstein had. a, (Passionate 
thirst_ for knowledge. While Elizabeth took pleasure in 
beauty, in the majestic and wondrous scenes which sur- 
rounded their Swiss home—Victor was not satisfied with 
the appearances of things. He had to find out their 
causes. The world to him was a secret he had to discover, 
and his earliest memory was his own curiosity, his need 
to iearn the hidden laws of nature. 
The family’s favorite home was not their house in the 
town, but their country house at Belrive on the eastern 
shore of Lake Geneva. Here Victor read and studied, 
choosing for company only his family and his closest 
school friend, Henry Clerval. Victor desired only to 
learn, though not about all things. Politics, government 
and languages bored him. It was the secrets of heaven 
and earth he was after, and whether he studied the out- 
- ward substance of things, or the inner spirit of nature 
and the mysterious soul of man, his curiosity was always 
about the physical secrets of the world. His childhood 
was a happy one, with his books, his loving Elizabeth, 
and the close bonds of friendship he formed with Henry 
Clerval. 
Frankenstein, in the darkness of his bedroom, 
dreamed on. His mind held the picture of his family as 
they were, with himself happy among them, for a few 
more seconds, before he saw himself on that fatal day. 
They were all at their summer home at Belrive, when 

12 FRANKENSTEIN 
they witnessed a violent and terrible thunderstorm. Fran- 
kenstein was fifteen years old and had, until then, 
learned much of his natural philosophy from sixteenth 
century writers such as Agrippa, who wrote of magic; 
Paracelsus, the (alchemist ‘and chemist, and Albertus 
Magnus, the thirteenth century scholastic philosopher. 
How was young Frankenstein to know that their ancient 
principles had been entirely exploded, that there was 
now a more modern system of science? His father was 
not scientific, and Frankenstein was left to struggle to 
teach himself these difficult subjects, which were not 
taught in the schools of Geneva. He searched these 
books for a way to find the Elixir) of life, tried to raise 
ghosts and devils through their incantations, and floun- 
dered through their ancient theories until the accident of 
the thunderstorm changed everything. 
The violent electrical storm burst from the heavens 
over the mountains of Jura. Frankenstein stood at the 
door of the house and watched the storm with delight. 
Suddenly a stream of fire rose from an old and beautiful 
oak tree which stood about twenty yards from the house. 
When the dazzling light vanished the oak disappeared, 
and nothing remained but a blasted stump. The bolt of 
lightning had destroyed the tree—and the power of elec- 
tricity had gripped Frankenstein’s imagination. No more 
was he interested in alchemy. The theory of electricity 
and/galvanism occupied him—and all the realm of mod- 
ern science. In his dream, Frankenstein relived the mo- 
ments of that terrible storm, the bursting thunder and the 

THE CREATION 13 
dazzling light that was to determine his destiny, to set 
him on a course from which there was no return. 
Next, he saw himself at seventeen. His parents had 
decided that he should become a student at the Uni- 
versity of Ingolstadt in Germany. His mother died of 
scarlet fever before he left, but shortly after, Franken- 
stein departed on the coach for the old university town. 
How young he was then, how eager to learn everything 
there was to know. His professors laughed when Fran- 
kenstein mentioned the ancient books of alchemy he had 
read. 
“How useless,” Professor Krempe had cried. “You 
must begin your studies all over again.” 
Frankenstein nodded; he knew the uselessness of those 
books as well as the professor. 
Frankenstein studied hard in all the branches of mod- 
ern science, especially chemistry and physiology. And as 
he studied, his mind was filled with one thought, one 
- conception, one purpose. 
“So much has been done,” he exclaimed. “More, far 
more, will I achieve. Following in footsteps already 
marked, I will pioneer a new way, explore unknown 
powers, and unfold to the world the deepest mysteries of 
creation.” 
His professors were delighted with Frankenstein’s in- 
telligence and interest in his work. 
“Continue to work hard,” Professor Waldman said, 
“and I have no doubt of your success.” 
Frankenstein took the professor’s advice. For two years 

14 FRANKENSTEIN 
he studied hard, making rapid and brilliant progress, un- 
til in the end he knew as much of the theory and practice 
of natural philosophy as the professors of Ingolstadt. He 
was about to return home to Geneva, when an incident 
happened that made him stay. 
What had interested Frankenstein most was the struc- 
ture of the human body and, indeed, anything that was 
endowed with life. It was the principle of life, the cause 
of generation he wished to discover, and to learn it, he 
studied death. It was a difficult and unpleasant study. 
Without his extraordinary enthusiasm, it would have 
been nearly impossible. But in Frankenstein’s education, 
his father had taken care that his mind should not be im- 
pressed with supernatural horrors. He had never been 
afraid of such things as ghosts and spirits. Darkness had 
no effect upon his imagination, nor graveyards or tombs. 
He spent days and nights in graveyard vaults, in char- 
nel houses where the dead are kept. He saw how the fine 
form of man was degraded and wasted, and how the cor- 
ruption of death succeeded to the bloom of life. He saw 
how the worm inherited the wonders of the eye and 
brain. 
After weeks examining and analyzing the causes of 
death, the changes from life to death, a light broke in 
upon the darkness, a light brilliant and wondrous, yet so 
simple! He had discovered what no man before him had 
understood—the secret of life itself. He could scarcely 
believe that he alone had been chosen to discover so 
astonishing a secret. 

THE CREATION ES 
After days and nights of incredible labor and fatigue, 
he had succeeded in understanding the principle of life. 
He became capable of bestowing it himself. The dis- 
covery was overwhelming. What had been beyond the 
understanding of the wisest men since the creation of the 
world was now within Frankenstein’s grasp. 
Frankenstein stirred in his sleep at the next vision 
sleep brought. It was himself, alone in the darkest night 
in the graveyards near Ingolstadt. It was his work, now 
that he had the power of giving life, to prepare a body to 
receive it. 
The dissecting room, the slaughterhouse, the grave, fur- 
nished his materials. Disturbing the tremendous secrets 
of the human frame, he worked in his solitary tower 
chamber, separated from the rest of the house by a long 
hall and a staircase. In the horrors of his secret toil, he 
felt he was losing his soul and he drove himself madly 
toward the completion of his work. Often, his human na- 
ture turned with disgust from his workshop of filthy cre- 
ation, but his purpose, to scale the heights of scientific 
achievement, spurred him on. 
The work was difficult. To prepare a body with all its 
intricacies of fibers, muscles and veins, to implant the 
organs and connect the arteries, was a labor which nearly 
defeated Frankenstein again and again. He wondered if 
he should have started with a simpler being, but his 
imagination was too exalted. His wish was to give life to 
a man. 
He found, when he had begun the creation of a hu- 

16 FRANKENSTEIN 

THE CREATION NF 
man being, that the smallness of the parts stopped him 
from working as quickly» as he wished. Contrary to his 
first intention, therefore, he made the being of a gigantic 
Stature, about eight feet in height and proportionately 
broad. 
Months passed, and in those months, Frankenstein’s 
ambition bore him onward like a hurricane. To break 
through the boundaries of life and death! To create a 
new species of beings who would bless him as their cre- 
ator. He might even, in time, though now he could not, 
learn enough to bring the dead back to life. 
These thoughts supported him during the horror of his 
labors. He was pale, emaciated from lack of food, often 
feverish, as he pursued nature to her hiding places. 
The graveyard! The vision of that dark, silent place, 
where only the moon witnessed his unhallowed labor, 
would not leave Frankenstein’s sleeping mind. He saw 
himself bending over an open grave, the coffin lid gaping 
-wide to expose the body in its shroud, the graveworms 
crawling among the folds. He bent closer, in the cold, 
shadowed night, and thought he saw his mother. 
Frankenstein woke from his sleep with horror; a cold 
perspiration covered his forehead, his teeth chattered, 
and every limb trembled: when, by the dim and yellow 
light of the moon, as it forced its way through the win- 
dow, he saw the monster. It moved heavily across the 
room, coming toward him—the miserable thing he had 
created. 
Frankenstein waited in horror. The monster parted the 

18 FRANKENSTEIN 
curtains of the bed. His eyes, if eyes they could be called, 
were fixed on Frankenstein. The monster’s jaws opened, 
and he muttered some strange, hoarse sounds, while a 
grin wrinkled his cheeks. The monster might have spo- 
ken, but Frankenstein did not wait to hear. The monster 
stretched out his hand, seemingly to stop his creator, but 
Frankenstein escaped, leaped from the bed, and rushed 
downstairs. He hid in the courtyard of the house, listen- 
ing, fearing that each sound would announce the ap- 
proach of the demoniacal corpse to which he had so 
miserably given life. 
No mortal could stand the horror of that face. A 
mummy brought back to life could not be so hideous as 
that wretch. Frankenstein had gazed upon him while he 
was unfinished and he was ugly then. But when those 
muscles and joints, when that face became capable of 
motion, the thing became a creature more nightmarish 
than any mind could imagine. And its hugeness, the very 
hugeness Frankenstein had planned, only TI EY its 
_ monstrosity. 
In the cold, dark courtyard, Dr. Frankenstein felt his 
pulse beat so quickly and violently that he was aware of 
every artery. Though the storm was over, the stones of 
the courtyard were chilled and damp. Dr. Frankenstein — 
sank down upon them and leaned against the dank, 
rough wall. He was exhausted from months of labor 
and the horror of this night. Mingled with the horror, 
he felt the bitterness of his disappointment. The exalted 
dreams, the joyous hopes of success in the creation of a 

THE CREATION 19 
noble and rational being, the marvelous sense of his own 
powers, the worth of his work to science, to humanity, all 
the heaven of his glorious ambitions—now had become a 
hell to him. The change was so rapid, the overthrow so 
complete! 
Sick with fear, Frankenstein remained in the court- 
yard throughout the night. Morning came at last, dis- 
mal and wet with the rain which poured again from a 
dark and comfortless sky. His sleepless and aching eyes 
sought the church of Ingolstadt with its white steeple and- 
clock. At six, the porter opened the gates of the court 
and Frankenstein went out into the streets, pacing them 
with quick steps, as if by moving quickly he could avoid 
the monster whom he feared to see at every turning of 
the street. He dared not return to the apartment where 
he lived but felt as though he had to hurry on, though he 
was drenched by the rain and exhausted in every limb. 
He continued walking for a long time, trying to ease 
the burden of his mind with bodily exercise. Through the 
narrow cobblestone streets of Ingolstadt he went, past 
houses whose ancient walls were built so close they 
seemed to huddle together for support and warmth. He 
_ passed the old dtica) palace and the Gothic church to the 
ruined and crumbling walls of the city. Then, tracing his 
way back, he was again among the twisting streets. But 
though Frankenstein moved on, he walked without any 
clear idea of where he was or what he was doing. Fright- 
ned, he hurried his footsteps, not daring to look about 
him— 

20 FRANKENSTEIN 
“Like one who, on a lonely road, 
Doth walk in fear and dread, 
And having once turned round, walks on, 
And turns no more his head; 
Because he knows a frightful fiend 
Doth close behind him tread.” 
The Ancient Mariner—Coleridge 
At last Dr. Frankenstein came to the inn where stage-. 
coaches and carriages usually stopped. The horses 
stamped the cobblestones restlessly and people were mill- 
ing about. Frankenstein paused, his eyes fixed on a coach 
that was coming toward him from the other end of the 
street. As it drew nearer, he saw that it was the Swiss 
stagecoach. It stopped just where he was standing, and 
when the door was opened, he saw within Henry Clerval, 
his oldest and closest friend, who instantly sprung out. 
“My dear Frankenstein,” exclaimed Clerval, “how 
glad I am to see you. And how wonderful that you 
should be here just at the moment I arrive.” 
Frankenstein all but flung himself upon his friend. He 
had never been so delighted to see anyone. Being with 
Clerval again brought back memories of his father, Eliz- 
abeth, the scenes of his home. He grasped Clerval’s hand 
and for a moment forgot his horror and misfortune. For 
the first time in many months he felt happy. The two 
friends walked through .the town of Ingolstadt toward 
Frankenstein’s college, talking of their friends, their fam- 
ilies, and of Clerval’s good news. 

THE CREATION 2] 
“I have finally persuaded my father to let me study 
~ here at the University of Ingolstadt with you,” said Cler- 
val. “Not natural science, of course. I shall master the lit- 
erature and the languages of the Orient.” 
“Nothing could please me more than to have your 
company,” answered Frankenstein, “but tell me again 
about my father, brothers, and Elizabeth. Are they really 
well?” It had been more than four years since he had 
seen them. 
“Very well, and very happy, but a little worried be- 
cause they do not hear from you very often. But my dear 
Victor,” continued Clerval, stopping short and gazing full 
in Frankenstein’s face, “I have just noticed how ill you 
look, so thin and pale. You seem as if you have not slept 
for several nights.” 
“You're right,” answered Frankenstein wearily. “I 
have been working so hard lately on one particular ex- 
periment that I have not allowed myself much rest, as 
you see. But I hope, I really hope, that the work is now 
at an end and that I am finally free.” 
Frankenstein trembled. He couldn’t bear to think 
about, much less discuss, what had happened the night 
_ before. He walked more quickly, and they soon arrived 
at his college. He looked up at the tower where his apart- 
ment was. What if the creature whom he had left in his 
rooms might still be there, alive, and walking about? He 
dreaded to see the monster. But he feared still more that 
Henry should see him. 
Frankenstein begged his friend, therefore, to wait a 

2D FRANKENSTEIN 
few minutes at the bottom of the stairs, while he himself 
went up to his apartment. He climbed to the topmost 
landing, passed along the hall, and began slowly to as- 
cend the dark, narrow staircase to the tower. He stood 
with his hand on the lock of the door and steadied him- 
self. He paused; a cold shuddering came over him. Then 
he threw the door open forcibly, like a child who expects 
to find a ghost waiting for him on the other side. But 
nothing appeared. He stepped fearfully in. The room 
which served as both workshop and sitting room was 
empty, and even his bedroom was freed from its hideous 
guest. He searched again carefully among the hangings 
of the great oaken bed, in the cavernous shadows of the 
open heavy wardrobe, and then in his workroom beneath 
the tables and behind the doors. Books were strewn 
about, the fragments of a glass bottle lay scattered on the 
floor, and several garments huddled in a crumpled pile 
near the wall as if they had been violently thrown. But if 
evidence abounded of the room’s former occupant, the 
occupant himself was gone. Frankenstein could hardly 
believe such good fortune. When he finally convinced 
himself that his enemy had really fled, he laughed for joy 
and ran down to Clerval. 
They climbed to Frankenstein’s rooms together, and a 
servant soon brought breakfast. But Frankenstein was 
unable to contain himself. It was not only joy that pos- 
sessed him. His flesh tingled as if it were being pricked 
by thousands of tiny pins, and his pulse beat rapidly. He 
could not remain in the same place for a single instant. 

THE CREATION 23 
He jumped over the chairs, clapped his hands, and 
laughed hysterically. 
At first, Clerval thought Frankenstein’s liveliness was 
due to the delight of his own arrival. But as he watched 
Frankenstein more carefully, Clerval saw a wildness in 
Frankenstein’s eyes he did not understand. He listened to 
the shrieks of heartless laughter with growing fear and 
astonishment. 
“My dear Victor! What for God’s sake is the matter?” 
cried Clerval. “Don’t laugh like that! How ill you are! 
What is the cause of all this?” 
“Do not ask me,” said Frankenstein, putting his hands 
over his eyes to shut out the terrible sight. For what he 
thought he saw, gliding into the room, was the hideous 
monster, his hands outstretched. “Ask him!” cried Fran- 
kenstein, pointing a trembling finger. “He can tell. Oh, 
save me! Save me!” Imagining that the monster had 
seized him, Frankenstein struggled furiously, and fell to 
the floor. 

“oj Dp |e 
The Escape 
It was difficult for the monster, later on, to remember 
his own beginning. Like a child’s memory of his first few 
years, the monster’s memory of his early weeks was con- 
fused. His sensations were so mixed together, that he 
saw, felt, heard and smelled things all at the same time. 
He could not tell his senses apart, and he understood 
nothing of the feelings that seized him as he awoke into 
the world. 
He remembered first the flickering light of the candle. 
But the small, bright flame was too strong for his eyes. It 
pressed upon his nerves and forced the monster to close 
his lids. Darkness then came over him and frightened 
him. Yet hardly had he felt this, when he opened his 
eyes and the light poured in upon him ae The second 
time, it was easier to bear. 
He found that he could move, sit up and then stand. 
With his hands outstretched before him, he stumbled for- 
ward and felt his way among the dark, shadowy shapes 

THE ESCAPE 25 
of things in the gloomy room where he had awakened. 
Objects fell, startling him with noises. It confused him to 
be surrounded by things he could touch but, in the dark- 
ness, could not see. A dank wind came in through the 
shutters and gave the monster his first sensation of cold. 
He stumbled, by chance, upon the open wardrobe and 
managed to cover himself with some clothes. 
It was the gust of air that drew him to the window. He 
climbed out, and along the balcony, until he came to 
another window through which he entered. More dark 
shapes—but from one of them came a sound, a low 
moan, which the monster sought until he found its ori- 
gin. Lifting the bedcurtain, he gazed down. Someone on 
the bed gave a cry. The monster’s vocal cords re- 
sponded with their first sound, and his hand groped 
instinctively toward the first living creature he had ever 
seen. The man cried out again and escaped into the 
darkness. The monster was alone once more. 
HeTurched from the room, half walked, half fell down 
the stairs, and found his way into the streets. In the 
black, rainy night, he wandered along deserted alleys, 
groping with his hands along the walls as if to find his 
way out of a maze. When the sky paled into the light of 
morning, the monster experienced a change in his sensa- 
tions. In the dark, troublesome objects had surrounded 
him. Now he found that he could wander easily, with no 
obstacles which he could not either climb over or avoid. 
He left the city and wandered into the open country. 
If the light had at first pleased him, by noon the heat 

26 FRANKENSTEIN 
of the sun wearied him and the day’s brightness after 
the rain hurt his eyes. His wanderings took him to the 
forest near Ingolstadt, and he found a place under the 
trees by the side of a brook. Here he lay and rested until 
he felt the first torments of hunger and thirst. This 
roused him from his exhaustion and he ate some dried 
berries which he found hanging on the trees or lying on 
the ground. He satisfied his thirst at the brook and then, 
lying down, was overcome by sleep. 
It was dark when he awoke. He felt cold and fright- 
ened in his loneliness. His few clothes were not enough 
to keep out the dew of night and he shivered, dimly 
aware of his own helplessness, his poor wretched misery. 
Feeling pain invade him from all sides, he sat down and 
wept. 
Soon a gentle light stole over the heavens and gave 
him a sensation of pleasure. He started up and saw a 
radiant form rise from among the trees. He did not know 
it then, but it was the moon, and he gazed at it with a 
kind of wonder. It moved slowly, but enlightened his 
path, and he went again in search of berries. He was still 
cold, when under one of the trees he found a huge cloak, 
with which he covered himself, and sat down upon the 
ground. No clear ideas occupied his mind. All was con- 
fused. He felt light and hunger and thirst and darkness. 
Many sounds rung in his ears, and on all sides smells 
greeted his nostrils. The only object that he could distin- 
guish was the bright moon, and he fixed his eyes on that 
with pleasure. 
a 

THE ESCAPE 27 
Days and nights passed before the monster learned to 
tell his senses apart. Little by little, he saw plainly the 
clear water that gave him drink and the trees that shaded 
him with their leaves. He was delighted when he first dis- 
covered that the pleasant sounds in his ears came from 
the small, winged animals which flew about the forest. 
Sometimes he tried to imitate the pleasant songs of the 
birds, but he could not. Sometimes he tried to express his 
feelings in his own way, but the terrible sounds which 
broke from his throat frightened him into silence again. 
The moon disappeared from the night and then came 
again, while the monster remained in the forest. All his 
sensations were clear by then and every day his mind re- 
ceived new ideas. His eyes became accustomed to the 
light and saw everything in its right form. Now he could 
tell the insect from the flower and the flowers from each 
other. He could tell the difference in each bird and the 
song it sang. 
One day, when the winter cold had grown bitter, the 
monster found a fire which had been left by some wan- 
dering beggars. He was delighted by its warmth. In his 
joy, he put his hand into the burning embers, and quick- 
ly pulled it out again with a cry of pain. How strange pts 
seemed to him that a thing could bring both pleasure 
and pain! 
He looked carefully at the materials of the fire and was 
happy to find that it was made of branches. He quickly 
collected some, but they were wet and would not burn. 
He sat, rocking himself sadly, and watched the fire. As 

28 FRANKENSTEIN 
he watched, he saw the wood which he had placed near 
the embers catch fire. He realized that the heat had dried 
the branches and, overjoyed by his discovery, busied 
himself collecting more wood to dry in order to have a 
large supply of fire. When night came on and the mon- 
ster grew sleepy, he was worried that his fire might go 
out. He covered it carefully with dry wood and leaves 
and placed wet branches upon it. Then he spread his 
cloak, lay on the ground, and sank into sleep. 
When he awoke in the morning, his first thought was 
of his fire. He uncovered it and a gentle breeze quickly 
fanned the embers into flame. He saw this, and made a 
fan of branches in order to wake the embers whenever 
he wished. When night came again, he found, with plea- 
sure, that the fire gave light as well as heat and kept the 
fearful darkness away. 
On another day, when he had been off hunting for 
food, he came back to discover some scraps of food, left 
by travelers who had used his fire. The cooked food tast- 
ed good to the monster and he tried, therefore, to cook 
his food in the same way by placing it on the live em- 
bers. He found it spoiled the berries but that the nuts 
and roots tasted much better. 
Food, however, became scarce in the wintry forest. 
The monster often spent a whole day searching in vain 
for a few acorns to stop the pangs of hunger. He decided 
to leave the forest of Ingolstadt and find a place where 
his few wants could be more easily satisfied. He was un- 
happy at leaving his fire, because he did not know how to 

THE ESCAPE 29 
start a new one. But he was too hungry to stay, and 
wrapping himself in his cloak, he struck out across the 
woods toward the setting sun. 
It took the monster three days to find his way out of 
the forest, but at last he found the open country. Snow 
had fallen the night before and the fields were white. 
The huge expanse of whiteness gave the monster a lonely 
feeling, and the cold wet of this strange stuff chilled his 
Teet: 
It was early in the morning. The monster longed for 
food and warmth. Stumbling across the snowy fields, at 
last he saw a small hut. As he had no memory of the 
houses at Ingolstadt, he examined the hut curiously. He 
found the door open and went in. 
An old man was inside, preparing his breakfast. 
Hearing a noise, he turned. 
“No, no!” he screamed, as the monster came toward 
him. “Stay away from me! Whatever you are, stay away!” 
The monster shook his head, for he did not understand 
the words. The man screamed again, ran out of the hut 
and sped across the fields. 
The monster was surprised at the man’s behavior, but 
he was delighted with the hut. Here the snow and rain 
could not reach him. The earth of the floor was dry. And 
there was food—bread, cheese, milk and wine. He liked 
the bread, cheese and milk, but the wine he did not like 
at all. After he had eaten, the monster lay down among 
some straw and fell asleep. 
It was noon when he awoke. Lured by the warmth of 

30 FRANKENSTEIN 
the sun, which shone brightly on the white ground, the 
monster determined to travel on. Remembering how 
hungry he had been, he put the remains of the old man’s 
breakfast into a bag and left the hut. 
He walked for several hours across barren country 
fields. He had learned how to use his body well now, and 
the monster’s stride, if clumsy, was strong and agile. 
At sunset, he arrived at a village. How miraculous it 
appeared to him. The huts, the neat cottages and the 
stately houses fascinated him by turns. The vegetables in 
the gardens, the milk and cheese that he saw placed at 
the windows of some of the cottages, sharpened his 
appetite. 
One small cottage at the edge of the village drew him 
especially. Its white walls under the low, snug roof 
reflected the rosiness of the setting sun, and he could see 
food through the small panes of its windows. 
The monster crept closer, peered through the window 
at the family eating supper within and then opened the 
door. He had hardly set his foot over the sill when one 
of the women fell to the floor in a faint and the children 
began to shriek. Soon the whole village was aroused. 
The monster staggered backward, out of the garden 
and into the lane. Men armed with pitchforks ran toward 
him, others stopped to pick up heavy stones, which they 
threw at the monster as hard as they could. The women 
and children fled screaming, but the men continued to 
attack the monster until he escaped, sorely bruised and 
hurt, to the fields beyond the village. 

THE ESCAPE 31 
In pain and misery he ran on until, in the growing 
darkness, he stumbled upon a low hovel. Fearfully, he 
crawled inside. For a long time, the monster sat not dar- 
ing to move, scarcely daring to breathe lest someone 
come upon him and hurt him again. He saw that the 
hovel adjoined a cottage of a neat and pleasant appear- 
ance, but after his last horrible experience, he did not 
dare to enter. 
He gazed about his wretched place of refuge. It was 
made of wood, and was so low he could not sit upright 
in it. No boards, however, had been placed over the 
earth which formed the floor. But it was dry and, al- 
though the wind entered the hovel through a thousand 
chinks in its walls, he found that he was at least sheltered 
from the snow and rain. 
Here, then, he stayed, happy to have found a refuge 
however miserable, from the terrible weather and, still 
more, from the cruelty of man. 
As soon as morning dawned, the monster crept from 
his shelter. He wanted to examine the adjoining cottage 
to see whether he could safely remain in the little’ hovel 
he had found. It leaned against the back of the cottage. 
On one side of the hovel was a pig sty, on the other side, 
a clear pool of water. The tiny entrance through which 
the monster had crept the night before was simply a 
doorless hole. In order to remain there unseen, the mon- 
ster set to work covering the hole and all the larger 
chinks with stones and pieces of wood. He arranged the 
wood and stones hiding the entrance in such a manner 

32 FRANKENSTEIN 
that he might move them when he wished to go in or 
out. All the light he enjoyed came through the pig sty, 
but it was enough for him. | 
When the monster had completed the walls to his sat- 
isfaction, he carpeted the floor with clean straw. He was 
by then weak with hunger, too weak to search the nearby 
woods or fields. On a window ledge of the cottage, he 
spied a loaf of bread and a cup. While he devoured the 
bread in large, hungry mouthfuls, the monster turned the 
cup around and around in his hands. When he had 
finished eating, he crouched beside the pool of water to 
drink. He was about to scoop the water with his hands as 
always, when he realized for what use the cup was in- 
tended. A delighted grin wrinkled his face, and he filled 
the cup over and over. 
Crouched by the water, the monster suddenly raised 
his head. He saw in the distance the figure of a man and 
remembered well his treatment of the night before. He 
clutched the cup and hurriedly clawed at the wood cov- 
ering the entrance to his hovel. Once inside, he carefully 
replaced the wood and twisted himself into as comfort- 
able a position as his cramped dwelling would allow. The 
floor was at least dry, and because the hovel was built 
near the chimney of the cottage, the monster felt a little 
of the chimney’s warmth. 
Lying there, he decided to stay in this place as long as 
he could, or at least until something should happen to 
change his mind. It was a paradise compared to the 
bleak forest with its rain-dropping branches and dank 

THE ESCAPE 33 
earth where he had spent the first weeks of his life. He 
finished the last few crumbs of his breakfast and was 
about to go outside to get a little water when he heard a 
step. 
The monster peered through a crack and saw a young 
girl with a pail on her head passing before his hovel. Her 
face, unlike all the human faces he had seen before, was 
gentle and kind. Yet she was poorly dressed, a coarse 
blue skirt and a little jacket being all her clothes. Her 
blond hair was braided. She looked patient, yet sad. For 
a moment, the monster lost sight of her. A little later, she 
returned, her pail now partly filled with milk. As she 
walked along, she was met by a young man, who spoke 
to her in a melancholy voice. He took the pail from her 
and they disappeared into the cottage. Soon the monster 
caught sight of the young man again, with some tools in 
his hand, crossing the field behind the cottage. The girl 
was busy too, the monster noticed, working sometimes in 
the yard, sometimes in the house. 
The monster wanted very much to see the inside of the 
‘cottage. He did not know how it could be managed until he 
examined the walls of his dwelling and found that there had 
once been a window on the wall where now the hovel 
leaned. The window panes had been filled up with wood, 
and in one of these there was a tiny crack. The monster dis- 
covered that if he put his eye very close, he could see the 
room within. 
It was a small room, whitewashed and clean, but al- 
most bare of furniture. A table, a few chairs, a dresser, a 

34 FRANKENSTEIN 
small bed with some extra blankets folded neatly nearby 
—these were all the cottage contained. In one corner, 
near a small fire, sat an old man, leaning his head on his 
hands. The young girl was busy arranging the cottage, 
but soon she sat down beside the old man. The monster 
watched as the old man picked up an instrument, began 
to play, and to produce sounds sweeter than the voice of 
the thrush or the nightingale. 
The music moved the poor monster to ecstasy, as did 
the sight of the two beings before him. He thought he 
had never seen anything so beautiful. The silver hair and 
the kind face of the old cottager won his reverence, and 
the gentle loveliness of the girl won his love. As the old 
man played his sweet, sad music, tears came to the eyes 
of the girl. This the old man did not notice, until the 
girl’s crying could be heard. Then he spoke to her, and 
the fair creature, leaving her work, knelt at his feet. He 
raised her, and smiled with such kindness and love that 
the monster felt sensations of a strange and overpower- 
ing nature. They were a mixture of pain and pleasure, 
such as he had never before experienced either from 
food or hunger, warmth or cold. He drew back suddenly, 
unable to bear his emotions. 
But he could not stop himself looking for long. Soon 
after, the young man returned, carrying on his shoulders 
a load of wood. The girl met him at the door, helped 
him to put down the wood, and took some of it into the 
cottage to place on the fire. Then she and the youth went 
to a nook of the cottage and he showed her a large loaf 

THE ESCAPE 35 
of bread and a piece of cheese. She seemed pleased, and 
went into the garden for some roots and plants, which 
she prepared to cook. 
Soon their dinner was ready and they sat down to eat. 
Night quickly fell, but to the monster’s extreme wonder, 
he found that the cottagers had a means of making light 
last—by the use of candles. He was happy to find that the 
setting of the sun did not put an end to the pleasure he 
experienced in watching his human neighbors. 
After dinner, the old man again took up the instru- 
ment and made more of those wonderful sounds which 
had enchanted the monster earlier. When the music was 
over, the young man began to make sounds that did not 
resemble the songs of birds at all. He was reading aloud 
from a book, but at that time, the monster knew nothing 
of words or sentences, and the sounds had no meaning 
_ for him at all. 
The monster lay back on his straw. How he longed to 
join these gentle people! But he dared not. He remem- 
bered too well how the people of the village had treated 
him. He would just stay quietly in his hovel, watching, 
and try to learn all he could about humans and their 
ways. 

Rejection 
THE MONSTER observed the cottagers throughout the win- 
ter. He saw that they were not entirely happy and that 
one of the reasons for this was their poverty. They had 
only the vegetables from their garden, the milk of one 
cow, and the small wages the young man earned working 
for a neighboring farmer. The monster noticed that the’ 
young people often suffered the pangs of hunger to give 
their dinner to the old man, who was blind and could 
not therefore see his children’s sacrifice. 
Their kindness to each other moved the monster. He 
had been accustomed, during the night, to steal a part of 
their food for himself. But when he found that in doing 
this he inflicted pain on the cottagers, he decided to steal 
no more of their food. From then on, he lived on berries, 
nuts and roots which he gathered from the nearby 
woods. He also discovered that he could help them by 
collecting wood for their fire. This he did by night, after 
learning to use the young man’s wood-cutting tools. It 

REJECTION 37 
pleased the monster that they looked happy and _sur- 
prised to find the wood there in the morning. 
The monster made two most important discoveries that 
winter. The first was that these people could express their 
feelings to each other by making sounds. To the monster, 
it was a godlike science, and he desired very much to 
learn it. If only they did not make so many sounds so 
quickly! But the monster listened hard, and at last he 
mastered a few of their words and understood their 
meaning. 
“Fire, milk, bread, wood,” he repeated delightedly 
again and again in his low, hoarse voice. “Felix, Agatha, 
father, sister, brother.”’ There was another word, “dear- 
est,” but he did not understand what it meant. 
He learned also about reading, that Felix could find 
the signs for speech on paper. How the monster wished 
to learn! He wanted so much to make friends with the 
cottagers, but he knew he had better not try until at least 
_ he had mastered their language. Being able to speak to 
them might make them overlook his deformity. 
Because that was the monster’s second discovery that 
winter—his own ugliness. For months he had admired the 
perfect forms of his cottagers, their grace, beauty and 
marvelous skin. Then, one evening, when he was out in 
the woods, he saw himself clearly reflected in a pool of 
water. He was terrified of the monster mirrored in the 
pool. At first, he leaped back, frightened at the unknown 
image. But when he realized that the yellow, wrinkled 
skin, the black lips, the colorless eyes, the crossing scars, 

38 FRANKENSTEIN 
and all the sum of those huge, hideous deformities was 
indeed himself—then he was filled with the bitterest mis- 
ery and shame. Alas! He still did not know how fatal his 
deformity would prove to be. 
As the sun became warmer, and the light of day long- 
er, the snow vanished, and the pleasant showers of 
spring brought leaves forth on the trees. The monster 
continued to observe the cottagers and formed in his 
imagination a thousand pictures of presenting himself to 
them. He imagined that they would at first be disgusted, 
until by his gentle words and behavior, he should win 
their favor and afterwards their love. He even imagined 
that it might be in his power to restore happiness to their 
sad faces. The spring brought him joy. His senses were 
refreshed by a thousand scents of delight and a thousand 
sights of beauty. He blotted the past from his memory 
and gilded his future with bright rays of hope. 
It was toward the end of May that an event occurred 
which changed the monster from what he had been into 
what he was to become. 
A beautiful lady arrived at the cottage on horseback. 
At the sight of her, the monster noticed, the expression 
of Felix’s face changed from sorrow to radiant happiness, 
and the sadness of the cottagers vanished into joy. The 
lady, whose name was Safie, was Felix’s sweetheart, and 
the thought that he had lost her forever had been the 
cause of his sadness. 
It was Safie’s father who had brought about the cot- 

REJECTION 39 
tagers’ ruin. The cottagers’ name was De Lacey, and Mr. 
De Lacey had been, only a few months before the 
monster’s arrival, a rich and respected man in Paris. On a 
visit to Paris, Safie’s father, a wealthy Turk, had been un- 
fairly arrested and condemned to death. Felix and his fa- 
ther risked their lives to save him, and Felix fell in love 
with Safie. But the ungrateful man had run off, taking Sa- 
fie, whom he had promised to Felix. When the French 
government found out that the De Laceys had helped 
the Turk to escape, the De Laceys were exiled to Ger- 
many without being allowed to take any of their money 
with them. Even worse, Felix had lost Safie. Now she 
had escaped her father and come to them, and Felix was 
happy once more. 
All this the monster learned later on. But what princi- 
pally affected him about Safie’s arrival was the fact that 
she could not speak the cottagers’ language. The monster 
watched them use signs at first and then understood, be- 
cause Safie kept repeating certain sounds, that she was 
trying to learn their language. The idea instantly struck 
the monster that he could make use of the same lessons. 
His summer days were spent in close attention, and it 
pleased the monster to find that he learned even more 
quickly than Safie. His speech organs were harsh but 
supple, and while Safie spoke in broken accents and un- 
derstood little, the monster understood and could imitate 
almost every word that was spoken. 
Because Felix read often from history books, the mon- 
ster gained a knowledge of the manners, governments 

40 FRANKENSTEIN 
and religions of the different nations of the earth. He 
heard about the ancient history of Asia, about the genius 
of the Grecians, the wars and virtues of the early Ro- 
mans, and also about the decline of that mighty empire, 
and the rise of chivalry, Christianity and kings. He 
heard of the discovery of America, and wept over the 
fate of the Indians. 
These stories gave the monster strange feelings. 
“Was man,” he thought, “at once so powerful, so 
virtuous, and magnificent, yet so cruel and mean? How 
can he be at one moment so evil and, at another, so no- 
ble and godlike? How can men murder each other, and 
why is there need for law and government?” 
Then, as Felix read on to Safie, the monster learned 
the strange system of human society. He heard of the di- 
vision of property, of great wealth and terrible poverty, 
of rank, family and noble blood. At length he under- 
stood that the possessions most valued by human beings 
were social position and riches. Without either of these, a 
man was doomed to waste his powers working for the 
profit of the chosen few. These words made the monster 
think of himself. 
“And what am I?” he reflected. “I know nothing of my 
beginning. I have no money, no friends, no kind of prop- 
erty. I have a face and figure hideously deformed and 
loathsome, and I am not even of the same nature as a 
man. I am more agile. I can live on coarser food. I can 
stand heat and cold better than they. I am even much 
larger than they are. But when I look around, I see and 

REJECTION 4] 
hear of none like me. Am I then a monster, a blot upon 
the earth, from which-all men will flee and which all 
men will disown?” 
These thoughts left him in agony. He tried to dispel 
them, but sorrow only increased with knowledge. He 
wished now that he had remained forever in the forest 
and had learned nothing beyond his first sensations of 
hunger, thirst and heat. 
“How strange knowledge is,” considered the monster. 
“It clings to the mind like moss on a rock.” 
He wished sometimes to shake off all thought and 
feeling, but he learned that there was but one means to 
overcome the sensation of pain, and that was death—a 
state which he feared yet did not understand. He ad- 
mired virtue and good feelings and loved the gentle 
manners of his cottagers, but he was shut out from them. 
All he could do was watch them, and this increased, 
rather than satisfied, the desire he had of becoming one 
among their company. He was alone, a miserable and 
> 
unhappy wretch. 
Other lessons were impressed upon him even more 
deeply. He heard of the difference between men and 
women, and the birth and growth of children. He heard 
how the father protected his children, and how all the 
life and cares of the mother were wrapped up in her 
family. He learned of brothers and sisters, and all the 
various relationships which bind one human being to 
another in mutual bonds. 
“Yet where are my friends and relations,’ > 
whispered 

42 FRANKENSTEIN 

REJECTION 43 
the monster to his lonely walls. “No father watched my 
infant days. No mother blessed me with smiles and ca- 
resses. Or if they did, I do not remember. My only knowl- 
edge of myself is that I have always been, in height and 
proportion, exactly as I am now. I have never seen a 
being who resembles me or one who might claim me. 
What am I?” 
He asked the question over and over again, and for 
answer heard only his own hoarse moan. 
While the monster improved his speech, he also 
learned the science of letters as it was taught to Safie. 
Before long, he knew how to read, and even to write, 
practicing his letters on the dirt floor of his hovel with a 
stick. 
So far, the monster still looked upon crime as a distant 
evil. Goodness and generosity were always before him in 
the lives of his protectors, his affectionate name for the 
De Laceys. 
Then one night, in the beginning of the month of Au- 
gust, the monster was in the woods collecting food for 
himself and fuel for the cottagers’ fire. As he searched 
about, he came upon a trunk filled with clothes and 
books. The clothes were even smaller than his own ill- 
fitting jacket and trousers and he left them. But the 
books he seized eagerly and carried off to his hovel. 
As he studied the books and pored over their contents, 
the monster’s mind received many new images and great- 
er impressions than before. So far, the cottage of his pro- 
tectors had been the only school in which he had studied 

44 FRANKENSTEIN 
human nature, but these new books developed his mind 
even more. As he read the histories and the romantic 
tales, the monster became convinced in his admiration 
for virtue and his hatred of vice. 
But one of the books, Paradise Lost, excited in him dif- 
ferent and far deeper emotions. Reading the story of 
God warring with his creatures filled the monster with 
wonder and awe. Then he began to compare his own sit- 
uation with the characters in the story. 
Like Adam, the monster was alone. But with what a dif- 
ference! Adam had come forth from the hands of God a 
perfect creature, happy and prosperous, guarded by the 
especial care of his Creator, and allowed to talk with and 
be guided by his God. 
“But I am alone,” reflected the monster. “Wretched, 
helpless and alone.” 
Many times he considered himself closer to Satan, for 
often, like Satan, when he saw the bliss of his protectors, 
the bitter gall of envy rose within him. 
To make matters worse, soon afterward, the monster 
found some papers in the pocket of his jacket, the jacket 
he had taken the night he left Frankenstein’s laboratory. 
Now he was to discover Dr. Victor Frankenstein! 
With trembling hands, the monster clutched the papers 
and read. They were Frankenstein’s journal of the four 
months that preceded his own creation. In the papers 
was described every single step in the progress of Fran- 
kenstein’s work. Everything was written which bore refer- 
ence to the monster’s accursed origin, all the disgusting 

REJECTION 45 
details of his creation, the minutest description of his 
odious and loathsome-person. All of it was written in 
language which painted Frankenstein’s own horrors of his 
work, and it was this which stamped forever on the mon- 
ster a horror of himself. 
He sickened as he read. 
“Hateful day when I received life!” he exclaimed in 
agony. “Accursed creator! Why did you form a monster 
so hideous that even you turned from me in disgust? 
God, in pity, made man beautiful, after His own image. 
But my form is a filthy type of yours, more horrid even 
from the very resemblance. Satan had his companions, 
fellow-devils, to admire and encourage him. But I am 
solitary and eae) 
These were the monster’s thoughts in his solitude. 
But when he observed the virtues of the cottagers, 
their generous and kindly habits, he persuaded himself 
that they would be compassionate about his deformity 
and love him because he loved them. Could they turn 
from their door one who, however monstrous, needed so 
much their compassion and friendship? 
He waited some months longer, the more to learn and 
the better to prepare himself. The happiness and the con- 
tentment of the cottagers increased. Every day, their feel- 
ings grew more serene and peaceful, while the monster’s 
became every day more agitated. Increase of knowledge 
only discovered to him more clearly what an outcast he 
was. He cherished hope now and then, it is true. But all 
he had to do was to see his person reflected in water, or 

46 FRANKENSTEIN 
his shadow in the moonshine, to know that his being 
loved was all a dream. 
“There will be no Eve to soothe my sorrows or share 
my thoughts. I am alone.” 
He remembered Adam’s prayer to his Creator. But 
where was his? He had been abandoned, and in the bit- 
terness of his heart, he cursed his creator. 
Autumn passed. The monster saw, with surprise and 
grief, the leaves decay and fall, and nature again assume 
the barren and bleak appearance it had worn when he 
first saw the woods and the lovely moon one year before. 
Yet the bleakness of the weather did not bother him. He 
had found that he was better fitted for the endurance of 
cold than heat. But his chief delights were the sight of 
the flowers, the birds and all the gay colors of summer. 
When those deserted the monster, he turned with even 
more attention to the cottagers. Their happiness was not 
lessened by the absence of summer. They loved and sym- 
pathized with one another, and their joys, depending’ on 
each other, were not cut off as the monster’s were, by the 
coming of winter. 
The more he saw of them, the greater became his de- 
sire to claim their protection and kindness. His heart 
yearned to be known and loved by these kindly crea- 
tures. To see their sweet looks directed toward him with 
affection was all his ambition. He dared not think that 
they would turn them from him with disdain and horror. 
The poor that stopped at their door were never driven 
away. He asked, it was true, for greater treasures than a 

REJECTION 47 
little food or rest. He needed kindness and sympathy. 
But he did not believe himself utterly unworthy of it. 
The winter advanced, and all the monster thought 
about was his plan of introducing himself into the cot- 
tage of his protectors. He pondered different ways, but 
the plan on which he finally decided was to enter the 
cottage when the blind old man was alone. He was wise 
enough to discover that the unnatural hideousness of his 
person was what had frightened people before. But the 
old man could not see and so would not be frightened. 
The monster’s voice, although harsh, had nothing terrible 
in it. He thought, therefore, that if he could just make 
friends with the old man first, the old man might help 
him gain the friendship of the young people. 
One day, when the sun shone cheerfully on the fallen 
red leaves, Felix, Agatha and Safie departed on a long 
country walk, and the old man, on his own desire, was 
left alone in the cottage. After they had gone, the old 
man took up his guitar and began to play softly. 
The monster’s heart beat quick. This was the hour and 
moment of trial which would decide his hopes or realize 
his fears. Save for the music, all was silent in and around 
the cottage. It was a perfect opportunity, yet when the 
monster rose, his limbs failed and he sank to the ground. | 
Again he rose, and made himself firmly remove the 
planks which concealed the entrance to his retreat. The 
fresh air revived him, and with renewed courage, he 
went to the door of the cottage and knocked. 
“Who is there?” said the old man. “Come in.” 

48 FRANKENSTEIN 
The monster entered. “Pardon me,” he said. “I am a 
traveler in want of a little rest.” 
“Enter,” said Mr. De Lacey. “Sit before the fire. I am 
sorry that my children are not here. I am blind, you see, 
and it might be difficult for me to find food for you.” 
The old man raised his sightless eyes and smiled. 
“Do not trouble yourself, kind sir,” said the monster. 
“T have food. It is only warmth and rest that I need.” 
The old man nodded his welcome. The monster sat 
down in silence. He did not know what to say next, or 
how to begin his plea. His large hands trembled and he 
breathed heavily. 
At length the old man spoke. “By your language, 
stranger, I suppose you are my countryman. Are you 
French?” 
“No,” answered the monster. “But I was educated by a 
French family and understand that language. I am now 
going to claim the protection of some friends, whom I 
sincerely love, and who I hope will receive me kindly.” 
The monster paused. “I am an unfortunate and deserted 
creature. I look around and I have no relation or friend 
upon earth. These kind people to whom I go have never 
seen me, and know little of me. I am full of fears, for if I 
fail there, I am an outcast in the world forever.” 
“Do not despair. To be friendless is indeed to be un- 
fortunate. But the hearts of men, unless they are blinded 
by self-interest, are full of brotherly love and charity. 
Rely, therefore, on your hopes. If these friends are kind, 
do not give up hope,” said the old man. 

REJECTION 49. 
“They are kind,” answered the monster. “They are the 
best creatures in the world. But unfortunately, they are 
prejudiced against me. I have a good disposition. My life 
has been harmless and even a little helpful. But a fatal 
prejudice clouds their eyes, and where they ought to see 
a feeling and kind friend in me, they behold a detestable 
monster.” 
“That is indeed unfortunate. But if you are truly 
blameless, can’t you make them see the truth?” the old 
man asked. 
“T am about to try, and that is why I am so fright- 
ened,” sighed the monster. “I tenderly love these friends. 
I have, for many months, been doing small kindnesses 
for them. But they believe I wish to injure them and that 
is the prejudice I wish to overcome.” 
“Where do these friends live?” the old man asked. 
“Near this spot,” the monster replied. 
The old man paused and then continued. “If you will 
tell me your whole story and all that troubles you, per- 
haps I can be of help. I am blind, and cannot judge your 
face, but there is something in your words which per- 
suades me that you are sincere. I am poor and an exile. 
But it will give me great pleasure to be of any service to 
a human creature.” 
“Excellent man!” cried the monster. “I thank you, and 
accept your generous offer. You raise me from despair 
by this kindness. And I hope that with your aid, I shall 
not be driven from the society and sympathy of your 
fellow-creatures.” 

50 FRANKENSTEIN 
‘Heaven forbid!” answered the old man. “Even if you 
were really a criminal, to be driven out can only make 
you desperate and never virtuous. I also am unfortunate. 
I and my family have been condemned, although inno- 
cent. Judge, therefore, if I do not feel for your mis- 
fortunes.” 
“How can I thank you, my best and only benefactor?” 
exclaimed the monster. “From your lips first have I 
heard the voice of kindness. I shall be forever grateful. 
And your kindness gives me hope that the friends I am 
going to meet will also be kind.” 
“May I know the names and address of these friends?” 
inquired the old man. 
The monster paused. This, he thought, was the mo- 
ment of decision, which was to rob him of, or give him, 
happiness forever. He tried hard to answer the old man’s 
question, but he had no strength left to speak. He sank 
on the chair and sobbed aloud. 
At that moment he heard the steps of his younger pro- 
tectors. He had not a moment to lose. Seizing the hand 
of the old man, he cried, ‘““Now is the time!—save and 
protect me! You and your family are the friends whom I 
seek. Do not desert me in the hour of trial!” 
“Great God!” exclaimed the old man. “Who are you?” 
At that instant the cottage door was opened, and Felix, 
Safie and Agatha entered. Their horror and fear flashed 
before the monster’s eyes. Agatha fainted. Safie rushed 
from the cottage. Felix leaped forward, and with brute 
force, tore the monster away from his father to whose 

REJECTION 51 
knees the monster clung. In a wild fury, Felix dashed the 
monster to the ground and hit him violently with a stick. 
The monster stood up. He could have torn Felix limb 
from limb as the lion tears the antelope. But the mon- 
ster’s heart was full of bitter sickness, and he did not 
touch the young man. He saw Felix on the point of rais- 
ing the stick again, when, overcome by pain and anguish, 
the monster ran from the cottage and escaped, unseen, to 
his hovel. 
“Cursed, cursed creator!” moaned the monster. 
Why did he live? Why, in that instant, did he not ex- 
tinguish the spark of existence which his creator had so 
carelessly bestowed? He did not know. Despair had not 
yet taken possession of the monster. His feelings were 
those of rage and revenge. He could with pleasure have 
destroyed the cottage and its people and have glutted 
himself with their shrieks and misery. 
When night came, the monster left the hovel and wan- 
dered in the woods. Now, no longer restrained by the 
fear of discovery, he gave vent to his anguish in fearful 
howlings. He was like a wild beast, destroying objects 
that got in his way and ranging through the woods as 
swiftly as a stag. What a miserable night he passed! The 
cold stars shone in mockery, and the bare trees waved 
their branches above him. All, save him, were resting or 
enjoying themselves. He, like the arch-fiend, bore a hell 
within him. Finding himself abandoned, he wished to 
tear up the trees, spread. havoc) and destruction around 
him, and then to sit down and enjoy the ruin. 

Sy FRANKENSTEIN 
But this was too much sensation to last. He grew tired 
with so much exertion and sank on the damp grass in the 
sick powerlessness of despair. There were none in all 
the world to pity or help him. Should he feel kindness 
toward his enemies? No. From that moment, he declared 
everlasting war against all mankind, and more than all, 
against the man who had formed him and sent him forth 
to his miserable agony. 
The sun rose. The monster heard the voices of men 
and realized that it was too late to go back to his hovel 
that day. He hid in some underbrush and devoted the 
day to thinking. 
The pleasant sunshine and the pure air of the day 
restored him to some degree of tranquility. He began to 
believe that maybe what had happened was his own 
fault. If only he had made friends with the old man 
slowly. He was a fool in exposing his person to the hor- 
ror of the young people. They ought to have been 
warned, prepared. Little by little, the monster convinced 
himself that all was not lost, that he would try again. At 
night, he crept forth from his hiding place, went in 
search of food to appease his hunger, and then returned 
to his hovel. All was at peace, and he waited, in silent 
expectation for the sun and the cottagers to rise. 
The sun rose at last and mounted high in the heavens, 
but the cottagers did not appear. The monster trembled 
violently, wondering whether some misfortune had oc- 
curred. The inside of the cottage was dark, and he heard 
no motion. His suspense became an agony. 

REJECTION 53 
Later in the day, two countrymen paused beside the 
cottage. They were soon joined by Felix. 
“Must you really move out of the cottage so soon?” 
asked one of the men. “You will be losing three months’ 
rent and the vegetables in your garden.” 
“I don’t care,” replied Felix, while the monster, hiding 
unseen, strained to catch every word. “We can never live 
in your cottage again. I have told you what happened. It 
has made my father very ill, and my wife and sister will 
never recover from their horror. Take your cottage back 
with no further discussion and let me fly from this 
place.” 
The monster saw Felix and his companions go into the 
cottage and come out a few minutes later. The monster 
never saw any of the De Lacey family again. 
He stayed in his hovel for the rest of the day in a state 
of utter and stupid grief. His protectors had gone and 
had broken the only link that held him to the world. For 
the first time feelings of revenge and hatred filled him 
without his trying to control them. When he thought of 
his cottagers, of the mild voice of the old man, the gentle 
look of Agatha, the beauty of Safie, tears gushed from 
his eyes. But then, when he reflected that they had 
spurned and deserted him, anger returned, a wild rage of 
anger. The horrible scene two days before haunted his 
vision—the females flying, the enraged Felix tearing him 
from the father’s feet. 
Furious, the monster, unable to injure anything hu- 
man, turned his anger toward inanimate objects. As night 

54 FRANKENSTEIN 
came, he placed straw and other inflammable stuff 
around the cottage. Then he destroyed the garden and 
waited for the moon to sink. 
In the night a fierce wind arose from the woods. The 
blast tore along like a night avalanche and produced a 
kind of insanity in the monster’s spirits which burst all 
bounds of reason. He lighted the dry branch of a tree, 
and danced with fury around the cottage. With a loud 
scream, he fired the straw and heath and bushes which 
he had collected. The wind fanned the fire, and the cot- 
tage was quickly enveloped by the flames, which clung to 
it, and licked it with their forked and destroying tongues. 
When he knew that the cottage was entirely destroyed, 
the monster screamed in agony and hatred once more 
and retreated backwards to seek refuge in the woods. - 

“oJ 4 |e 
Revenge ™ 
THAT NIGHT and all the next day the monster spent ram- 
paging through the woods. On the second evening he 
sank in exhaustion near the rim of the pool where, 
months before, he had first seen his own image reflected 
in the clear water. The late autumn moon rose, and by 
its light he saw himself again. Only this time he knew 
what he had not known then—the terrible cost of his un- 
natural appearance. 
“I must leave here,” thought the monster. “There is 
too much to remind me of what I have lost.” 
~ But where? Where, with the whole world before him, 
should he turn his face? Hated and despised, he knew 
that every country must be equally horrible. Puzzling the 
matter over and over, he sat throughout the night, 
wrapped in his cloak, on the cold, hard ground. 
As morning dawned, at length he thought of Franken- 
stein. Those papers he had found in the pocket of his 
jacket had told him that Frankenstein was his creator, his 

56 FRANKENSTEIN 
father. And to whom could the monster apply with more 
fitness than to the one who had given him life? 
Among the lessons Felix had given Safie was geogra- 
phy. The monster had learned a little about the locations 
of the different countries of the earth. In the papers, 
Geneva was mentioned as the name of Dr. Franken- 
stein’s native town. It was to Geneva that the monster 
decided to go. 
But how was he to direct himself? He knew that he 
was now in southern Germany and that to reach Geneva 
he must travel in a southwesterly direction. But the sun 
was his only guide. He had no compass. He did not 
know the names of the towns that he was to pass 
through, nor could he ask information from a single hu- 
man being. Only from Frankenstein could he hope for 
help, although LOWES Frankenstein he felt nothing but 
hatred. 
“Unfeeling, heartless creator!” the monster cried in the 
moonlight. “You endowed me with perceptions and pas- 
sions and then cast me out, an object for the scorn and 
horror of mankind.” 
But only on Frankenstein had the monster any claim 
for pity and help, and from him the monster determined 
to seek the justice he could not hope to find in any other 
human being. 
The monster slept that day and began his journey the 
following night. He knew his travels would be long and 
his suffering intense as he left the place where he had 
lived for nearly a year. He traveled only at night, afraid 

REVENGE 57 
to encounter the face of a human being. As he went 
through the mountains of southern Germany, nature de- 
cayed around him and the sun lost its heat. Rain and 
snow poured down on him and he saw that the mighty 
rivers were frozen. The surface of the earth was hard and 
chill and bare, and he found no shelter. How often did 
the monster scream curses on the cause of his being! The 
mildness of his nature had fled, and all within him was 
turned to gall and bitterness. The nearer he approached 
Switzerland and Frankenstein’s home, the more deeply 
did he feel the spirit of revenge kindle in his heart. 
Snow fell and the waters hardened, but the monster 
did not rest. In a leather wallet lost on a twisting moun- 
tain trail, the monster found a map of the country. This, 
and now and then a sign, helped to direct him, but he 
often wandered wide from his path. The agony of his 
feelings left him no peace, and every small incident 
was food for his rage and misery. There was one incident 
especially that confirmed the bitterness and horror of his 
feelings. 
After four months of painful exposure and near starva- 
tion as he traversed the cold German landscape, the 
monster arrived in the northeast part of Switzerland. The 
sun had begun to recover its warmth and the earth to 
look green. Though he generally only traveled by night, 
one morning the monster found that his path lay through 
a deep wood. So dense was the wood that the monster 
thought he might be able to continue his journey unseen 
even after the sun had risen. 

58 FRANKENSTEIN 
The day, which was one of the first of spring, cheered 
even him by the loveliness of its sunshine and the balmi- 
ness of the air. Emotions of gentleness and pleasure that 
had long seemed dead arose within him. Half surprised 
by these unexpected feelings, he allowed himself to be 
carried away by them, and forgetting his solitude and de- 
formity, he dared to be happy. Soft tears again wet his 
cheeks, and he even raised his eyes with thankfulness to- 
ward the blessed sun which bestowed such joy on him. 
He continued to wind among the paths of the wood 
until he came to its edge, which was skirted by a deep 
and rapid river. Trees bent their branches into the river, 
and the branches were now budding with the fresh 
spring. Here the monster paused, not exactly knowing 
which way to go, when he heard the sound of voices. 
Quickly, he hid himself under the shade of a cypress. He 
was scarcely hid when a little girl came running toward 
the place where the monster had concealed himself. She 
was laughing as if she were being chased in a game. The 
monster smiled in pleasure at the sight of her, her braids 
flying, as she ran along the steep riverbank. 
Suddenly, as the monster watched, the little girl’s foot 
slipped and she fell into the rapid current of the water. 
He rushed from his hiding place, plunged into the river, 
and with a great effort fought his way through the cur- 
rent. He managed to save the little girl and drag her to 
shore. She was senseless. Gently the monster held her, 
and not knowing what else to do, sat down with the little 
girl on his lap and began to pat her cheeks. 

REVENGE 59 

60 FRANKENSTEIN 
In a moment the underbrush parted and a man ap- 
peared. With a look of horror and disbelief on his face, 
he dashed forward and tore the little girl from the mon- 
ster’s arms. With staring eyes, he backed away, turned, 
and began to run into the deeper parts of the wood. 
Without thinking, the monster followed. 
“Don’t run away,” he called out. “You have nothing to 
fear from me. I did not hurt your daughter. I only pulled 
her from the river. Please . . . wait—” 
The monster’s long strides allowed him to catch up 
with the man rapidly. As he moved forward, his arms 
outstretched, the man turned, his eyes wild with anger 
and terror. When the monster drew near, the man aimed 
a gun which he had been carrying. He pointed the gun at 
the monster’s body and fired. The monster fell to the 
ground, and the man, with increased swiftness, escaped 
into the wood. 
This then was the reward of the monster’s benevo- 
lence. He had saved a human being from destruction, 
and, in return, he now writhed under the miserable pain 
of a wound which shattered his flesh and bone. 
The feelings of kindness and gentleness which had 
filled him only a few moments before gave place to hell- 
ish rage. The monster gnashed his teeth. Inflamed by 
pain, he vowed eternal hatred and vengeance to all man- 
kind. But the agony of his wound overcame him. His 
pulse weakened and he fainted. 
For some weeks he led a woeful life in the woods, 
trying to cure his own wound. The bullet had entered his 

REVENGE 61 
shoulder, and he did not know whether it had remained 
there or passed through. At any rate, he had no means of 
taking the bullet out. His sufferings were increased also 
by the terrible sense of injustice and by the ingratitude 
which had caused his pain. His daily vow was for re- 
venge—a deep and deadly revenge, which alone would 
compensate for the outrages and anguish he had endured. 
After several weeks his wound healed and he contin- 
ued his journey. The agony he endured was no longer to 
be brightened by the warm sun or gentle breezes of 
spring. All joy was but a mockery, which insulted his 
loneliness and made him feel more painfully that he was 
not made for enjoyment or pleasure. 
It took him two months to cross Switzerland, avoiding 
as he must the easier, well-traveled roads. Searching his 
way among the steep Alpine passes, descending into val- 
leys only to climb again, the monster moved on. It was 
late in the spring when his tortuous journey drew to a 
close, and he reached the outskirts of Geneva. 
It was evening when he arrived. He looked immediate- 
ly for a hiding place in the fields near the town. He 
wanted to think in what manner he ought to approach 
Frankenstein. He was tired and hungry and far too un- 
happy to look with pleasure at the greenness of the fields 
or the golden sun setting beyond the eastern mountains 
of Jura. He moved closer to the town and found refuge 
among some trees in a lovely park just outside the walls 
of Geneva. 
In the soft early evening, the monster fell asleep. 
~ 

62 FRANKENSTEIN 
At dusk a movement in the bushes which encircled the 
small clearing where the monster slept startled him 
awake. Before the monster had time to withdraw and 
hide, a little boy darted into the clearing. He could not 
have been more than five years old. His sturdy figure was 
clothed in a blue velvet suit the color of his thickly lashed 
eyes, and curling hair framed his face which was rosy with 
health. The delighted laughter of his game of hide-and- 
seek dimpled his cheeks. He did not yet see the monster. 
As he gazed at the little child, the monster was 
entranced, and an idea came into his mind. 
“Surely this little creature has lived too short a time to 
have learned a horror for deformity,’ the monster 
thought hopefully. “He is too little to mind my ugliness. 
If I catch him, I can teach him to be my companion and 
friend. Then I will not be so alone on this peopled earth.” 
In his need for a friend, the monster crept up behind 
the child, who was peering out through the bushes. The 
monster stretched out a large, scarred hand, grabbed the 
little boy and spun him around. 
When the boy saw the monster’s face, the smile froze on 
his lips, and he covered his terrified eyes with his little 
hands and screamed. 
The monster forced the boy’s hands from his eyes and 
said, “Child, don’t scream. Do not cover your eyes. There 
is no need to be afraid of me. I shall not hurt you. Listen 
loemie:2 
The boy struggled violently. 
“Let me go!” he cried. “Let me go, monster! You are 

REVENGE 63 
ugly, you wish to eat me. You will tear me to pieces, you 
are an ogre! Let me go or I will tell my father!” 
The monster held the boy tighter between his hands. 
“Boy, you are not going to see your father again,” 
cried the monster. “You must come with me and be my 
friend now.” 
The little boy hit the monster with his small fists and 
continued to scream. 
“Ugly monster!” he cried. “Let me go. My father is a 
very important man. He is Mr. Frankenstein. He will 
punish you! You do not dare to keep me!” 
The monster’s black lips parted horribly, drawn back 
from the ghastly white teeth. 
“Frankenstein!” he hissed. “You belong then to my 
enemy—to him toward whom I have sworn eternal re- 
venge. I shall indeed carry you off and you shall be my 
boy, not his!” 
The child still struggled in the monster’s grasp, twisting 
and turning and crying out the worst insults he could 
think of. 
“You ugly thing, no boy would want to come with 
you,” the child shrieked. “You are too horrible for anyone 
in the whole world to want to be your friend! Ugly, ugly, 
ugly,” yelled the boy. 
The words carried a greater and greater despair to the 
monster’s heart. He could bear them no more. With tears 
in his eyes, he grasped the child’s throat to silence him. 
In a moment the boy lay at his feet. 
It was an accident. The monster had not meant to at- 

FRANKENSTEIN 64 

REVENGE 65 
tack the boy. But as he rose and gazed down upon his 
victim, the monster felt his heart swell with a hellish 
triumph. Clapping his hands insanely, he exclained: 
“I, too, can create desolation and despair! My enemy 
Dr. Frankenstein can be hurt as well as I. This accident 
will bring unhappiness to him, and a thousand other mis- 
eries shall torment and destroy him!” 
As the monster fixed his eyes on the child, he saw 
something glittering on the child’s breast. He took it. It 
was a locket, and inside the locket there was the tiny 
painting of a most lovely woman. In spite of the mon- 
ster’s evil mood, the picture softened and fascinated him. 
For a few moments he gazed with delight on her dark 
eyes, fringed by deep lashes, and her lovely lips. But 
soon the monster’s rage returned. He remembered that 
he was never to be allowed the delights of such beautiful 
creatures, and that whoever the woman was, she would 
look at him, not with the pleasant expression of the pic- 
ture, but with fear and disgust. 
Thinking such thoughts, the monster ground his teeth 
in fury. 
“Why do I stand here in my agony?” he cried against 
the darkening sky. “Why do I not rush among mankind 
and perish in the attempt to destroy them?” 
The monster staggered out of the clearing and from 
the park he crossed a country field, seeking a place to 
hide from his crime. 
There was nowhere, nowhere for him to go. Almost 
out of his mind, for a long time he ran madly in circles. 

66 FRANKENSTEIN 
Then across one of the fields he saw a barn. As he 
came closer he heard no sound. He thought the barn 
must be empty so he went inside. 
The barn was not empty. As the monster’s eyes grew 
accustomed to the dark, he saw that a young woman was 
sleeping on some straw. Silently, the monster bent over 
her in the dark. 

a] 5 |e 
The Horrible Truth 
FOR SEVERAL months after the monster escaped, Dr. 
Frankenstein lay ill of a nervous fever. During all that 
time, Henry Clerval was his only nurse, taking care of 
him and watching over his friend day and night. Henry 
did not tell the Frankenstein family how serious Victor’s 
illness was because he knew how the news would worry 
Victor’s father and how unhappy it would make 
Elizabeth. 
But Frankenstein was in reality very ill. Only such 
constant care as Henry’s could have restored him to 
health. In Frankenstein’s delirium, the form of the mon- 
ster to whom he had given life was forever before his 
eyes, and he spoke of the monster feverishly in the man- 
ner of someone crying out in a nightmare. Henry be- 
lieved Victor’s words to be the wanderings of a disturbed 
imagination, though after a while he did come to think 
that his friend’s sickness was indeed due to some strange 
and terrible event. 

68 FRANKENSTEIN 
Slowly, and with many relapses, Frankenstein recov- 
ered. When he was first able to sit up and look out the 
window with pleasure, he saw that November’s fallen 
leaves had disappeared and that the green leaves of April 
were shooting forth from the trees. It was a divine spring, 
and the season helped greatly in making him better. Lit- 
tle by little, his gloom departed. 
“Dear Clerval,” he exclaimed, “how kind, how very 
good you are to me. You’ve spent this whole winter, not 
in study as you promised yourself, but wasting your time 
in my sick room. How shall I ever repay you?” 
“You will repay me entirely if you get well as speedily 
as you can,” answered Clerval smiling. “And since you 
appear in such good spirits, I may speak to you on one 
subject, may I not?” 
Frankenstein trembled. One subject! What could it be? 
Could he mean the one horrible thing about which 
Frankenstein did not even dare to think? 
“Be calm,” said Clerval, who saw Frankenstein grow 
pale. “I will not mention it, if it upsets you. But your 
father and Elizabeth will be very happy if they receive 
a letter from you in your own handwriting. They are so 
worried about you.” 
“Is that all, my dear Henry?” smiled Frankenstein. “I 
shall be only too glad to write a letter to those I love so 
dearly.” 
“Then perhaps you will also be glad to read this letter 
from Elizabeth,” said Clerval. “It came for you some days 99 
ago. 

THE HORRIBLE TRUTH 69 
“My own dear Elizabeth,” cried Frankenstein, reach- 
ing for the letter and opening it. 
“My DEAREST VICTOR,” the letter began. “You have 
been ill, very ill, and even Henry’s kind letters do not 
reassure me that you are better. One line from you, 
written in your own hand, is necessary to calm my own 
and your father’s fears for you. If we do not hear from 
you soon, we shall ourselves come to Ingolstadt. Henry, 
who has been so good a friend to you, to all of us, writes 
that you are getting better. We hope with all our hearts 
that this is true and wait for a letter from you to prove it. 
“Get well and return to us. You have been away so 
long, nearly five years. Do return, and you will find a 
happy, cheerful home and friends who love you dearly. 
Your father’s health is excellent, and he asks only to see 
you. Ernest is sixteen years old now and wishes for a 
military career. He is not the brilliant student you are, 
so perhaps a military career is best for him. I must tell 
you, too, about our darling little William. I wish you could 
see him. He is very tall for his age, and when he smiles, 
two little dimples appear on each cheek. He is so bright, 
and he charms us all. He has already had one or two 
little wives, but Louisa Biron is his favorite, a pretty 
little girl five years old. 
“Do you remember Justine, the young girl we took 
into our household, who has always served us so faith- 
fully and who took care of your mother during her last 
illness? You used to say just one glance from her cheered 
you. She is so clever and gentle with William and we 
love her so much. She sends you her best regards. 
“Little change, except the growth of our children, has 
taken place since you left us. The blue lake and the 
snow-clad mountains never change nor does our con- 
tented, happy home. Write, dearest Victor—one line— 

70 FRANKENSTEIN 
one word will be a blessing to us. Ten thousand thanks 
to Henry for his kindness, his affection, and his many 
letters. We are sincerely grateful. Take care of yourself, 
I beg you, Victor, and I beg you, write! 
ELIZABETH” 
“Dear, dear Elizabeth,” exclaimed Frankenstein, when 
he had read her letter. “I will write her immediately that 
they need not worry about me any more.” 
Less than two weeks later, Frankenstein was able to 
leave his room. His first duty was to introduce Clerval to 
the professors of the university of Ingolstadt. In doing 
this, he suffered badly. 
Ever since the fatal night, the end of his labors, and 
the beginning of his misfortunes, he had undergone a 
violent dislike even for the name of natural science. Just 
the sight of a chemical instrument would renew his ner- 
vous symptoms. Henry saw this, and had removed all 
Frankenstein’s apparatus from view. He also changed 
Frankenstein’s apartment, for Henry saw that his friend 
hated the room which had been his laboratory. But these 
cares of Clerval’s became useless when Frankenstein vis- 
ited the professors. When Professor Waldman praised 
Frankenstein’s astonishing progress in the sciences, Fran- 
kenstein felt tormented by the reminder of where his 
work had led him. He writhed under Waldman’s words, 
yet dared say nothing. Clerval noticed Frankenstein’s 
pain, but he asked no questions of his friend. Franken- 
stein was grateful, for though he loved Clerval, he could 
never bring himself to speak of the horrors of that night. 

THE HORRIBLE TRUTH fit 
Professor Krempe was even worse than Professor 
Waldman. 
“T tell you, Clerval, your friend Frankenstein has out- 
stripped us all. Stare if you please, but it is nevertheless 
true. This young man is superior in brilliance to every 
professor at this university. His future will astound us, I 
am sure,” said Professor Krempe. Noticing that Franken- 
stein had turned pale, he added, “How modest you are, 
Frankenstein. You do not like such praise?” 
For once Frankenstein was glad that Clerval had never 
shared his taste for natural science. Henry had come to 
the university to make himself master of oriental lan- 
guages and literature, and Frankenstein, hating his own 
former studies, now joined Clerval as a fellow pupil in 
Persian, Arabic, and Sanskrit. 
Summer passed away in these studies, and Franken- 
stein’s return to Geneva was fixed for the end of autumn. 
But winter and snow arrived too early, the roads were 
impossible to travel, and his journey was put off until 
spring. The friends passed the winter cheerfully in Ingol- 
stadt, and early in the spring took short trips into the 
countryside. 
“Dear Henry,” said Frankenstein gratefully. “You 
have brought me back to health and good spirits. Once 
again I can enjoy the beauty of nature and the excellent 
conversation of a friend. Too long I selfishly shut myself 
up for a single purpose, but now I am free from it and 
shall never think of it again.” 
“T am glad to see you so happy, Victor,’ > 
said Henry, 

72 FRANKENSTEIN 
as they walked in the forest near Ingolstadt on the Sun- 
day before Frankenstein’s return to Geneva. 
It was a glorious spring day. The flowers of the season 
bloomed in the hedges, the sky was a clear, lovely blue, 
and the air was fresh and invigorating. Clerval was de- 
lighted to see his friend enjoy it all. 
In the evening they returned to their rooms in the 
highest spirits. There was a letter waiting for Franken- 
stein from his father. 
“My DEAR VICTOR,” it said. “You have waited for this 
note, no doubt, to let you know that we expect you. At 
first I was only going to write you a few lines to wel- 
come you. But that would be a cruel kindness, and I 
dare not do it. What would be your surprise, my son, 
when you expected a happy and glad welcome, to see us 
all in tears and misery?. And now, Victor, how can I tell 
you of our misfortune? How can I give such pain to my 
long absent son? I wish to prepare you for the terrible 
news. 
“William has been injured—that sweet child, whose 
smiles delighted and warmed my heart, who was so 
gentle, yet so gay! 
“T will tell you now how it happened. 
“Last Thursday (May 7th), I, Elizabeth, and your two 
brothers went to walk outside the town in Plainpalais 
Park. The evening was warm and quiet, and we walked 
farther than usual. It was already dusk before we thought 
of returning. Then we discovered that William and Ernest, 
who had been walking ahead of us, were not to be found. 
We rested on a bench for a while until they should re- 
turn. Soon Ernest came, and asked if we had seen his 
brother. He said that he had been playing hide-and-seek 
with William and that William had run away to hide 

THE HORRIBLE TRUTH 73 
himself. Ernest had looked for him, could not find him, 
waited for him. William did not return. 
“Ernest’s story worried us, and we continued to search 
for William until night fell, when Elizabeth suggested 
that he might have returned to the house. He was not 
there. We went back to the park with torches, for I could 
not rest thinking that my sweet boy had lost himself and 
was exposed to all the damps and dews of night. Eliza- 
beth also suffered extremely. About five in the morning I 
discovered my lovely boy, whom the night before I had 
seen blooming and in active health, stretched on the grass 
pale and motionless. The finger-prints of his attacker were 
plain in the bruises on my boy’s throat. 
“T carried William home. The worry on my face alarmed 
Elizabeth and she rushed to see William. She examined 
William, and then William’s neck and clothes. Finally, 
she burst into tears and exclaimed, ‘Oh God! It is all 
my fault!’ 
“She fainted and was restored with extreme difficulty. 
Then she told me that before our walk, William had 
begged and begged her to let him wear a very valuable 
locket that she possessed of your mother. The locket is 
gone and was doubtless what tempted the attacker. We 
have no trace of him at present, though we make every 
effort to discover who he was. 
“William will not, or can not, speak. The doctors say 
he may be better in time, but as yet the boy can give us 
no help in discovering the identity of the attacker. He 
was so badly frightened, poor child. 
“Come, dear Victor. Only you can console Elizabeth. 
She weeps constantly and accuses herself unjustly as the 
sole cause of William’s accident. Your dear mother! Alas, 
Victor! I now say, Thank God she did not live to witness 
this cruel, miserable attack upon her youngest darling! 
“Come home quickly, Victor. We need your love and 
consolation. Your affectionate and unhappy father. 
ALPHONSE FRANKENSTEIN” 

74 FRANKENSTEIN 
Clerval, who had watched Frankenstein’s face as he 
read the letter, was surprised to see his friend’s happy 
expression turn to despair. Frankenstein threw the letter 
on the table and covered his face with his hands. 
“My dear Frankenstein,” said Henry, “are you always 
to be unhappy? My dear friend, what has happened?” 
Frankenstein motioned to Clerval to read the letter 
and began to pace the room. 
“What can I say to you, my friend?” cried Clerval. 
‘How awful this is!) What do you intend to do?” 
“To go instantly to Geneva. Come with me, Henry, to 
order the horses and carriage,” answered Frankenstein. 
During their walk, Clerval tried to comfort Franken- 
stein. He could only express his heartfelt sympathy. 
“Poor William,” he said. “That dear, lovely child. To 
have been attacked so mercilessly, to feel his attacker’s 
grasp, and now to lie, ill and terrorized, with such a 
memory to haunt his little mind. Poor little fellow, how 
dreadful for him. How dreadful for all of you!” , 
In a daze, Frankenstein thanked Clerval for his sym- 
pathetic words. They arrived at the inn, ordered the 
horses, and in less than an hour, Frankenstein bade fare- 
well to his friend. 
His journey was very melancholy. At first he wished to 
hurry on, for he longed to console and sympathize with 
his loved and sorrowing family. But when he drew near 
his native town, he slowed his progress. He could hardly 
bear the strong feelings that crowded into his mind at the 
sight of so many scenes familiar to his youth. He had 

THE HORRIBLE TRUTH TS 
been away for nearly six years—two years of study, two 
years working on his ghastly experiments, half a year ill, 
and a little more than a year studying with Henry Cler- 
val. Frankenstein wondered how much might have 
changed in all that time. But more than the wondering 
made him slow his journey. A sudden fear came over 
him. He dared not go on. He dreaded, he knew not why, 
a thousand nameless evils. 
He remained for two days at Lausanne, gazing at the 
calm lake and the snowy mountains. By degrees, the 
calm and beautiful scene made him feel better, and he 
continued his journey to Geneva. 
The road ran beside Lake Geneva. He could see the 
black sides of the Jura mountains and the bright summit 
of Mont Blanc. He wept like a child. 
“Dear mountains! My own beautiful lake! How do you 
welcome your wanderer? Is your beauty a welcome or a 
mockery at my unhappiness?” 
He was so moved to be back in his beloved, native 
country that he wept again. Yet, as he drew nearer home, 
grief and fear again overcame him. Night also closed 
around, and the picture of the dark mountains appeared 
to him a vast and dim scene of evil. He had the feeling 
that he was destined to be the most wretched of human 
beings. 
It was completely dark when Frankenstein arrived at 
Geneva. The gates of the town were already shut, and he 
had to spend the night at a neighboring village. Being 
unable to rest, he decided to visit the spot where William 

76 FRANKENSTEIN 
had been found. As he went, he saw the lightning begin 
to play on the summit of Mont Blanc. A storm ap- 
proached rapidly. Frankenstein climbed a hill to watch 
the progress of the storm. 
It advanced. The rain soon began to fall in large 
drops, and the thunder burst with a terrific crash over his 
head. Flashes of lightning dazzled his eyes, lit up the 
lake until it appeared like a vast sheet of fire, and then 
left the world in darkness until it flashed again. 
While Frankenstein watched the war in the skies, so 
beautiful yet terrifying, he moved on with quick steps. 
Then in the gloom, he saw a figure which stole from 
behind a clump of trees not far away. 
Frankenstein stood still, gazing intently. He could not 
be mistaken! A flash of lightning illuminated the figure 
and revealed its shape. The gigantic height, the deformity 
of its face instantly informed Frankenstein that it was the 
hideous monster to whom he had given life. 
“What is he doing here?” Frankenstein wondered. 
“Could he be—” Frankenstein shuddered, “—the one 
who attacked my brother?” 
No sooner did that idea cross his imagination than he 
became convinced of its truth. His teeth chattered and he 
leaned against a tree for support. 
The figure passed Frankenstein quickly and was lost in 
the darkness. Nothing in human shape could have hurt 
that fair child. He was the attacker! Frankenstein could 
not doubt it. He thought of chasing the demon, but it 
would have been in vain. 

THE HORRIBLE TRUTH Vi 

78 FRANKENSTEIN 
Another flash of lightning showed Frankenstein the 
monster clinging to the rocks of a mountainside impossi- 
ble for ordinary human beings to climb. The mountain 
was situated south of the park, and how the monster 
managed to scale its steep side, Frankenstein could not 
imagine. The monster soon reached the summit and 
disappeared. 
Frankenstein remained still. The thunder stopped, but 
the rain still continued. All was darkness. The thousand 
details Frankenstein had tried to forget concerning the 
creation of the monster now churned in his brain—all the 
labor beforehand, the moment it had come to life, its es- 
cape. Two years had passed since the night the monster 
came alive. Was this his first crime? Alas! Had Franken-— 
stein turned loose into the world a depraved wretch 
whose delight was in destruction and misery? 
The agony Frankenstein suffered that night cannot be 
described. Cold and wet, unable to rest, he wandered 
about in the open air. He thought of the evil being he 
had cast among mankind, endowed with the will and 
power to cause horrible suffering, such as the attack 
upon Frankenstein’s own brother. The monster seemed 
to Frankenstein that night like his own ghostly vampire, 
his own spirit let loose from the grave, forced to destroy 
all that was dear to him. 
“God, what have I done?” he wondered. “For what 
am I responsible?” He shivered in his cloak and stared 
wildly up at the heavens. For answer, there were only 
the torrents of rain pouring down from the skies. 

THE HORRIBLE TRUTH 719 
Day dawned. Frankenstein bent his steps toward the 
town. The gates were open, and he hurried through the 
Streets to his father’s house. His first thought was to tell 
what he knew of the attacker and cause instant chase to 
be made. But he paused when he thought about the story 
he had to tell. 
He had created a being. He had given it life. He had 
then met this creature at midnight and seen it climb 
among the precipices of a mountain no one could climb. 
Who would believe him? 
He remembered that everybody knew of his delirium 
at the time of the monster’s creation, and they would 
believe his tale to be simply a nightmare caused by fever. 
Would not the story sound like the ravings of insanity? 
Besides, even if he could make someone believe him, 
what use would there be in chasing the monster? Who 
could arrest a creature capable of scaling the overhang- 
ing sides of Mont Saléve? No. It was better to keep silent, 
Frankenstein reflected, and he made up his mind to say 
nothing. j 
It was about five o’clock in the morning when he en- 
tered the large hall of his father’s house. He told the ser- 
vants not to disturb the family, and went into the library 
to wait until they rose. Wearily, Frankenstein threw him- 
self into a chair in front of the fire. 
It was Ernest who greeted him first. He had heard 
Frankenstein arrive and, dressing quickly, hurried 
downstairs. 
“Welcome, my dearest Victor,” he said. “Ah, I wish 

80 FRANKENSTEIN 
you had come three months ago, and then you would 
have found us all joyful. You come now to share our 
misery instead. Yet your presence will, I hope, revive our 
father and comfort Elizabeth. Poor William, our darling 
and our pride. He still suffers and cannot speak.” 
A mortal agony crept over Frankenstein. To imagine 
his family’s unhappiness was bad enough. To witness it 
was Worse. 
“Elizabeth needs comforting most of all,” Ernest con- 
tinued, “since she still accuses herself of having been the 
cause of William’s horrible experience. But since the at- 
tacker has been discovered—” 
“The attacker discovered! Good God! How can that 
be? Who could attempt to pursue him? It is impossible. 
One might as well try to overtake the winds, or confine a 
mountain stream with a straw. I saw him, too. He was 
free last night,” cried Frankenstein. 
“I do not know what you mean,” replied Ernest, won- 
dering. “But to us, the discovery we have made com- 
pletes our misery. No one would believe it at first, and 
even now Elizabeth will not be convinced in spite of the 
evidence. Indeed, who would believe that Justine, who 
was so good, so fond of all the family, could suddenly 
become capable of so frightful a crime as to attack a de- 
fenseless child?” | 
“Justine! Poor, poor girl, is she the accused?” ex- 
claimed Frankenstein. “But she is accused wrongfully. 
Surely, no one believes she is guilty, Ernest?” 
“No one did at first. But several things have come out 

THE HORRIBLE TRUTH 81 
that have almost forced us to believe her guilty. And her 
own behavior has been so confused that it only adds evi- 
dence to the facts. But she will be tried in court today, 
and you will then hear the whole story,’ answered 
Ernest. 
“Tell me now,” pleaded Frankenstein. “I must hear it 
now.” 
Ernest sat down near his brother before the library 
fireplace. He placed his hand on Frankenstein’s arm and 
began to speak. 
“On the morning we found William’s body, Justine 
took sick and was kept in bed for several days. During 
this time, one of the servants, happening to examine the 
clothing Justine had worn on the night of the attack, dis- 
covered in Justine’s pocket the jeweled locket with the 
picture of our mother in it. The servant, without saying 
anything to the family, took the locket to the magistrate. 
Justine was arrested immediately and accused of the 
attack upon William. The poor girl only confirmed the 
suspicion by her extreme confusion of manner.” 
Frankenstein thought this a strange tale, but it did not 
shake his faith in Justine’s innocence. “You are mistak- 
en,” Frankenstein told his brother. “I know the attacker. 
Justine, poor, good Justine, is innocent.” 
At that instant, Frankenstein heard his father’s foot- 
steps in the hall. When his father entered, they greeted 
each other warmly. 
“Father,” said Ernest. “Victor says that he knows who 
attacked William.” 

82 FRANKENSTEIN 
“We do also,” replied their father. “Isn’t it terrible, 
Victor, to discover so much criminality and ingratitude in 
a woman we thought so devoted to us?” 
“My dear father,” exclaimed Frankenstein. “Justine 
has done nothing. She’s innocent.” 
“If she is, God forbid that she should suffer as guilty. 
She is to be tried today, and I hope, I sincerely hope, 
that she will be acquitted.” 
This speech calmed Frankenstein. He was strongly 
convinced in his own mind that neither Justine nor any 
other human being was guilty. Thus he had no fear 
that any evidence existed strong enough to convict her. 
Frankenstein’s story of the monster was not one to an- 
nounce publicly. Its astounding horror would be looked 
upon as madness. To believe his story of the monster, 
people would have to see the creature with their own 
eyes. If William would speak—but William would not, or 
could not, tell of what had happened to him. And with- 
out William’s evidence to convince everyone, there was 
no use in Frankenstein telling his story. 
The men were soon joined by Elizabeth. Time had 
changed her since Frankenstein had seen her last. It had 
endowed her with loveliness even beyond the beauty of 
her childish years. She welcomed Frankenstein with the 
greatest affection. 
“Your being here, Victor, gives me hope,” said Eliz- 
abeth softly. “You, perhaps, will find some way to help 
my poor innocent Justine. I know she is innocent. She 
cannot be guilty of such a crime.” 

THE HORRIBLE TRUTH 83 
“She is innocent,” Frankenstein reassured her, “and 
that much shall be proved. Have no fear.” 
“Oh, Victor, how glad I am to hear you say so,” re- 
sponded Elizabeth, as she took his arm. “Everyone else 
believes her guilty, and this has made me feel so 
helpless.” 
“Dearest Elizabeth, dry your tears,” said Frankenstein. 
“It will all come out right. Now take me to see our little 
William. How is he today?” 
“The doctors hope he will be well in a few months’ 
time,” she answered, as she led Frankenstein up the wide 
stairway and along the hall to William’s nursery. “But as 
yet he is very weak. The poor boy was so terribly fright- 
ened, Victor.” 
Justine’s trial began at eleven o’clock that morning. All 
of Frankenstein’s family were required as witnesses, and 
Victor Frankenstein accompanied them to court. During 
the whole awful mockery of justice, Frankenstein suffered 
living torture. Were two people, first William and now 
Justine, to be punished for his curiosity in the realms of 
natural science, his unlawful experiments? Was another 
life to be ruined and he the cause? A thousand times 
would he rather have confessed himself guilty to the 
crime of which Justine was accused. But he had been ab- 
sent when it happened, and no one would believe such a 
confession. He was therefore forced to sit by and watch. 
Justine seemed to be calm. She looked so honest, so 
pretty, so innocent. But as the trial began, several strange 

84 FRANKENSTEIN 
facts came out which might have staggered anyone who 
did not know, as Frankenstein did, the truth. 
The facts were these: A market-woman had seen 
Justine, early in the morning, near the spot where Wil- 
liam was later found. Justine, it was proved, had been 
out all the night before. When the market-woman asked 
Justine why she was there, Justine had appeared con- 
fused. When Justine had returned to the Frankenstein 
house and was asked why she was out all night, she re- 
plied that she had been looking for William. Then, when 
she was shown William’s unconscious form, she became 
hysterical and ill. The locket with the picture was then 
produced from her clothing. 
When the court heard these facts, there was a murmur 
of horror and disgust. 
Justine was called on for her defense. She had wept 
and looked miserable when she was being accused, and 
now did her best to explain the facts. 
“God knows how entirely innocent I am,” she began. 
“T can explain all of these facts, if you will listen to me. 
That evening, I had been given permission by Miss Eliz- 
abeth to visit my aunt in a village just outside Geneva. 
On my return, at about nine o’clock, I met a man who 
said they were looking for a lost child, little William 
Frankenstein. I was alarmed and spent several hours 
looking for William myself. I could not find him and 
decided to go back to the house. But by then, the gates 
of Geneva were shut and I was forced to remain outside. 
I found a barn just beyond the Plainpalais Park and 

THE HORRIBLE TRUTH 85 
slept for several hours. In the morning, I searched again, 
but if I came near the spot where William lay, I did not 
know it. I recall meeting the market-woman, but if I 
seemed confused, perhaps it was because I was worried 
and had not had much sleep. That is all I know,” ended 
Justine. “I understand that it is the locket which most 
condemns me, but of that I have no knowledge. I do not 
know how it came into my pocket. Perhaps the attacker 
placed it there. But I do not know how. And I do not 
know why, after he had just stolen it, he should want 
to part with it so soon. I understand how fatal this fact 
is to my case, but I beg you, do not let it condemn me. 
Surely there are witnesses to my good reputation who 
will tell you that I could never be guilty of such a terrible 
thing.” 
Among other witnesses, Elizabeth came forward to de- 
fend Justine’s character, to speak of her devotion and to 
insist upon her innocence. 
“Besides,” ended Elizabeth, “why should Justine have 
wanted to steal such a trinket when, because I value her 
so much, I would have been delighted to give it to her 
for the asking?” . 
A murmur of approval followed Elizabeth’s simple 
and powerful appeal. But the approval was not for 
Justine. It was for Elizabeth’s loyalty. The public was still 
furious at the ingratitude they felt Justine had displayed 
by her act. 
Frankenstein’s anguish was now extreme. Was it possi- 
ble that the monster had not only attacked the child but 

86 FRANKENSTEIN 
had also the malice to leave the locket as evidence on the 
person of Justine? Frankenstein’s horror mounted, espe- 
cially when he saw that the faces of the judges had al- 
ready condemned the unhappy victim. Justine’s torture 
could not equal his own. She knew her own innocence, 
but Frankenstein suffered the tortures of remorse. 
He passed a hideous night. In the morning, he re- 
turned to court. His lips and throat were parched. He 
dared not ask the fatal question. The ballots had all been 
counted, and he was told the results. Justine was 
condemned. 
With heart-sickening despair, Frankenstein then heard 
that Justine had confessed! What could it mean? Had he 
gone mad? 
Elizabeth was heartbroken when Frankenstein re- 
turned home with the news. She wished immediately to 
visit Justine in the prison to which she had been con- 
demned for life on a charge of attempted murder and 
theft. 
They entered the gloomy prison and went down the 
dark stairs to the cells below. They saw Justine sitting 
on some straw in the back of her cell, her head resting 
on her knees. She rose at seeing her visitors and threw 
herself at Elizabeth’s feet. 
“Oh Justine,” wept Elizabeth, “why did you rob me of 
my belief in your innocence by confessing?” 
Justine’s voice was suffocated by sobs. “The priest 
threatened me that I would go to hell and my soul be 
damned forever if I did not confess. I did confess so that 

THE HORRIBLE TRUTH 87 
the priest would bless me, but that confession was a lie. 
It is the lie which now makes me more miserable than all 
else. God in heaven forgive me!” She paused, weeping, 
and then continued, “Please, sweet lady, do not believe 
your Justine capable of a crime only the devil would 
commit!” 
“Oh Justine, forgive my having doubted you,” cried 
Elizabeth. “I shall come here and visit you often, and 
shall never give up trying to release you.” 
“Do not worry about me, dear lady,” said Justine soft- 
ly, her eyes shining. “God is with me now and, as I think 
I shall die soon in this place, it will not be long before I 
shall be with God. May He bless you all. Remember me, 
dear lady, do not forget me.” 
Thus the poor girl tried to comfort herself. But there 
was no consolation for Victor Frankenstein. He felt him- 
self guilty of the entire tragedy, and a deep and bitter 
agony filled him as he listened to Justine’s farewell. 
“Goodby, sweet lady, dearest Elizabeth, my beloved 
and only friend. May heaven bless and preserve you. 
May this be the last misfortune that you will ever suffer. 
Live and be happy, and make others so.” 
The next day Justine died. Frankenstein entered a hell 
whose fires nothing could extinguish. From the tortures 
of his own heart, he turned to see the deep and voiceless 
grief of his Elizabeth. This also was his doing! And his 
father’s agony over William, this too! All was the work 
of his own accursed hands. 
Worse, in the deep recesses of his soul, he sensed that 

88 FRANKENSTEIN 
this was not the end of their sorrow. He, who would give 
his life for all of them, he, Frankenstein, who had no joy 
except through them, would be the cause of yet more 
tears and suffering. 
Torn by remorse, horror and despair, he saw those he 
loved watching over the bed of William and the grave of 
Justine, the first hapless victims of his unhallowed arts. 

|| 6 |e- 
Face To Face 
NOTHING COULD remove the weight of despair and re- 
morse which pressed on Frankenstein’s heart. Justine was 
dead and at rest, but he was alive to suffer. Sleep fled 
from his eyes. He wandered about his father’s house feel- 
ing like an evil spirit who had committed deeds horri- 
ble beyond description. How strange to think that he had 
begun life with good intentions, that he had thirsted for 
knowledge to make himself useful to his fellow-beings. 
Now all his youthful hopes were gone, and Frankenstein 
spent his days brooding under a dark cloud of guilt and 
self-torture. This state of mind nearly ruined his health 
again, and made all sounds of joy a mockery. Solitude 
was his only consolation—deep, dark, deathlike solitude. 
“You must not sorrow so deeply,” said his father. 
“Too much grief prevents one not only from all enjoy- 
ment, but even from daily usefulness, without which no 
man is fit for society.” 

90 FRANKENSTEIN 
Yet his father’s words came from a serene and guiltless 
mind. Such was not Frankenstein’s case, and he could 
only feel despair and hide himself as much as possible 
from his father’s view. 
As it was June and the beginning of summer, the fami- 
ly soon left Geneva for their country home at Belrive. 
This change was especially welcome to Frankenstein. 
The shutting of the gates regularly at ten o’clock, and the 
impossibility of staying out on the lake after that hour, 
had made living within the walls of Geneva very uncom- 
fortable for him. Now he was free, out in the country, to 
seek the solitude he so much needed. 
Often, after the rest of the family had gone to bed, 
Frankenstein took a boat out on Lake Geneva, and with 
the sails set, let the wind carry him out to the middle of 
the dark waters. There he was alone with his miserable 
reflections. Often he was tempted, when all was at peace 
around him and he the only unquiet thing that wandered 
restless, to plunge into the silent lake and let the waters 
close over him and his calamities forever. But then he 
thought of Elizabeth, whom he loved, and his father and 
brothers. He could not leave them unprotected and ex- 
posed to the malice of the fiend whom he had let loose 
among them. 
This was what tortured Frankenstein most. He lived in 
daily fear that the monster whom he had created would 
attack again and again,.as long as anything Frankenstein 
loved remained alive. 
Frankenstein’s hatred of this fiend cannot be de- 

FACE TO FACE 9] 
scribed. When he thought of the monster, he gnashed his 
teeth, his eyes became inflamed, and he wished nothing 
so much as to see the monster again in order to avenge 
the attack on William and the death of Justine. 
When he saw Elizabeth bending in care over little Wil- 
liam’s bed or listened to her mourning the death of 
Justine, Frankenstein suffered the most agony. It made 
him feel, though he had not actually committed any 
crime, as though he had. 
Neither his father’s concern nor Elizabeth’s love could 
help him. Less and less often was he able to find peace. 
Finally, one day, his whirlwind passions drove him to 
seek relief in bodily exercise and a change of scene. He 
hired a horse and rode toward the near Alpine valleys 
and sought, in the magnificence and the eternity of such 
scenes, to forget himself and his sorrows. 
He decided to travel to the valley of Chamonix, high 
in the French Alps. It was August, and the weather was 
lovely as Frankenstein rode up the ravine of the Arve 
River. The weight upon his spirit lightened as he went 
higher into the ravine. The immense mountains and cliffs 
hung over him on every side, and the sound of the river 
raged among the rocks. Still he made his horse climb high- 
er, and the ravine grew more magnificent than before. 
Ruined castles hung on the steep precipices of the moun- 
tains, and behind these mountains were the mighty Alps. 
Their white and shining peaks towered above all, as if 
they belonged to another earth and were the home of an- 
other race of beings. ~ 
we 

92 FRANKENSTEIN 
Frankenstein crossed the ravine over the bridge of 
Pélissier and began to climb the mountain which over- 
hung the ravine. Soon after, he entered the valley of 
Chamonix. Here were no more ruined castles, but only 
the high and snowy mountains. Immense glaciers ap- 
proached the road, and he heard the rumbling thunder 
of a falling avalanche. Glorious and supreme, Mont 
Blanc raised its domed peak majestically over all. 
A tingling, long-lost sense of pleasure came to Fran- 
kenstein as he rode toward the village of Chamonix. In 
his room at the inn, he remained at the window long into 
the night, watching the lightning play above Mont Blanc 
and listening to the rushing of the Arve River as it pur- 
sued its noisy way beneath. At length the sound soothed 
him, and sleep came at last. 
For a day, Frankenstein rested and roamed about the 
valley at the foot of the glacier. The steep sides of vast 
mountains were before him, and the solemn silence was 
broken only by the thunderous sounds of an avalanche 
or the cracking of the ice echoing among the mountains. 
The silence and beauty did not remove his grief, but at 
least they quieted it and gave him some measure of 
peace. | 
In the morning, it was raining and thick mists hid the 
summits of the mountains. Despite this, Frankenstein 
decided to climb the summit of Montanvert to view the 
tremendous and ever-moving glacier. He wished to go 
alone, without a guide, as the presence of someone else 
would destroy the solitary grandeur of the scene. 

FACE TO FACE’ 93 
It was a steep and dangerous climb, and it was nearly 
noon when Frankenstein arrived at the top. For some 
time, he sat upon a rock overlooking the sea of ice. Vast 
mists rose and curled in wreaths about the opposite 
mountains and drifted across the glacier. After Franken- 
stein had rested, he went down onto the ice. The surface 
was very uneven, rising like the waves of a troubled sea. 
The field of ice was wide, and he spent nearly two hours 
in crossing it. The opposite mountain was a bare, perpen- 
dicular rock. When he reached it, Frankenstein could see 
Montanvert exactly across from him at a distance of 
three miles. He remained in a crevice of the rock and 
gazed at the river of ice as it wound among the moun- 
tains whose icy and glittering peaks shone in the sunlight 
over the clouds. 
“How marvelous!” Frankenstein cried aloud, and as 
he did, he suddenly saw a figure, at some distance, ad- 
vancing toward him with superhuman speed. It bounded 
over the crevices in the ice, among which Frankenstein 
had walked with caution. Its stature also, as it ap- 
proached, seemed to Frankenstein larger than that of a 
man. Frankenstein was troubled. A mist came over his 
eyes, and he felt a faintness seize him. But the cold air of 
the mountains restored him, and he looked again. 
It was the monster, the wretch whom he had created! 
The horrible and loathsome sight made Frankenstein 
tremble with rage. Standing against the rock, Franken- 
stein resolved to wait until the monster came near and 
then to kill him. 

94 FRANKENSTEIN 
The mists parted. The monster came closer. His face 
spoke bitter anguish, combined with scorn and malice. 
Its unearthly ugliness made it almost too horrible for 
human eyes. Under the long cloak, the monster’s ragged 
clothes bared the scarred, wrinkled skin of his throat, 
forearms, and the huge, dangling wrists and hands. 
“Devil!” screamed Frankenstein in raging fury. “How 
dare you come near me! Are you not afraid of the ven- 
geance I will take upon your miserable head? Begone, 
vile monster! Or rather, stay, that I may trample you to 
dust. If only, by killing you, I could bring the victim you 
attacked back to health and the victim you murdered 
back to life!” 
The monster swayed before Frankenstein, the watery 
eyes fixed on his creator and the black lips curled with 
defiance. 
“I expected this sort of welcome,” said the demon.“All 
men hate the wretched. How then must I be hated, who 
am miserable beyond all living things! Yet you, my cre- 
ator, detest and turn me away. I am your creature. We are 
bound by ties which can only be broken by the death of 
one of us. Your purpose is to kill me? How dare you 
play with life in this way? Do your duty toward me, and 
I will do mine toward you and the rest of mankind. If 
you will agree to my conditions, I will leave them and 
you in peace. But if you refuse, I will feed the jaws of 
death until it is filled with the blood of your remaining 
friends.” ; | 
“Abhorred monster!” cried Frankenstein. “Fiend that 

FACE TO FACE 95 
you are! The tortures of hell are too small a vengeance 
for your crimes. Wretched devil! You blame me for 
your creation. Come on then, that I may extinguish the 
spark of life which I so carelessly bestowed.” 
Frankenstein’s rage was beyond control. He sprang on 
the monster with all his strength. 
The monster easily threw him off and said, “Be calm! I 
beg you to hear me before you let loose your hatred. 
Have I not suffered enough that you wish to add to my 
misery? Life, though hard, is dear to me and I will de- 
fend myself. Remember, before you attack me, that you 
made me more powerful than yourself. I am greater in 
height and strength than you. But I have no wish to set 
myself against you. I am your creature. You are my lord 
and king and I will obey you, if only you will do your 
part and give me what you owe me. Oh, Frankenstein, 
why are you fair to other beings and trample only me? 
You ought to give justice, mercy, and affection to me 
most of all. Remember that I am your creature. I ought 
to be your Adam, but instead I am the fallen angel 
whom you drive from joy. Everywhere on earth I see 
happiness, which I alone am forbidden. At first I was 
kindly and good. Misery made me a fiend. Make me 
happy, and I shall again be virtuous.” 
But Frankenstein stood firmly on the ice, and raising 
his arm, pointed his finger toward the distance. 
“Begone!” he cried. “I will not hear you. There can be 
no talk between us. We are enemies. Go! Or let us try 
our strength in a fight in which one of us must die!” 

96 FRANKENSTEIN 
But the monster did not move, and continued to plead 
with Frankenstein. As the wrinkled, black lips formed 
words, every muscle in the monster’s face twitched visi- 
bly under the thin, yellow skin. 
“How can I make you understand?” the monster cried 
hoarsely. “Is there no way I can beg for your mercy, no 
way to implore your goodness and compassion? Believe 
me, Frankenstein. I was kind. My soul glowed with love 
and humanity in the first months of my life. But am I not 
alone, miserably alone? You, my creator, hate me. What 
hope can I gather from your fellow-men who owe me 
nothing? They kick me away, stone me, hate me.” 
The monster broke off to gesture toward the white and 
empty scene. “The lonely mountains and dreary glaciers 
are my refuge. I have wandered here many days. The 
caves of ice, which I alone do not fear, are home to me, 
the only home which man will allow me. These bleak 
skies are my comfort, for they are kinder to me than 
your fellow men. If the rest of mankind knew of my exis- 
tence, they would do as you do and arm themselves to 
destroy me. Shall I not then hate them who hate me? I 
will not make peace with my enemies. I am miserable, 
and they shall share my wretchedness.” 
Now the monster bent closer toward Frankenstein. 
“Yet it is in your power to make it up to me and to de- 
liver mankind from my anger, which will soon grow into 
so great an evil that not only you and your family, but 
thousands of others, shall be swallowed up in the whirl- 
winds of its rage. Let me make you understand and do not 

FACE TO FACE 97 
scorn me. Listen to my tale of what has happened to me. 
Afterward, abandon me or feel sorry for me as you think 
I deserve. But hear me. Even by human laws, the guilty 
are allowed to defend themselves before they are con- 
demned. Listen to me, Frankenstein. You accuse me of 
murder, and yet you would murder me. But I do not ask 
you to spare me, only to listen. Then, if you can and if 
you will, destroy the work of your hands.” 
Frankenstein shuddered. “Why do you make me re- 
member that I made you, that I am the cause of so much 
evil? Cursed be the day, abhorred devil, when you first 
saw light! Cursed be the hands that formed you! You 
have made me so miserable that I have no power to con- 
sider whether I am fair to you or not. Go away! Take 
from me the sight of your detested form.” 
The monster raised a huge, hideous hand—not to 
strike, but to place it across Frankenstein’s eyes. “Now 
you cannot see me,” said the monster. “But still you can 
listen to me and grant me your mercy. By the virtues that 
I once possessed, I demand this from you. Hear my tale. 
It is long and strange.” 
Frankenstein flung the monster’s hand away in vio- 
lence and was again seized by a fit of shuddering. 
“You are cold,” said the monster. “You cannot bear 
this temperature as well as I. Come to my hut upon the 
mountain. The sun is still high in the heavens. Before it 
sets beyond the snowy peaks, you will have heard my 
story and can decide. It will then rest on you whether I 
leave mankind forever and lead a harmless life or become 

98 FRANKENSTEIN 
a force of evil to terrify you and your fellow-beings.” 
As the monster spoke, he led the way across the ice. 
Frankenstein followed, partly from curiosity and partly 
because he had begun to be impressed by the monster’s 
arguments. For the first time, Frankenstein considered 
the duties of a creator toward his creature, and that he 
ought to make his creature happy before he complained 
of the creature’s wickedness. 
He went with his monster, therefore, across the ice and 
they climbed the opposite rock. The air was cold, and it 
started to rain again. The monster climbed quickly and 
waited for Frankenstein at the door of the hut with a 
look of triumph. With a heavy heart, Frankenstein 
passed before the monster and entered the wooden hut. 
The monster lighted the fire, and Frankenstein sat near it 
with his odious companion to listen to the monster’s tale. 
As he listened, Frankenstein was moved to pity the 
poor monster. When he spoke of the early days of his 
life, his confused memory of only the hurtful light and 
the chilling cold until his arrival in the forest of Ingol- 
stadt, Frankenstein’s anger fled. Then the monster went 
on to tell his creator of his loneliness and his fear, the 
gradual discovery of his senses, and the hunger for food 
that drove him from the forest. The monster’s voice 
broke in anguish as he told Frankenstein of the old man 
who had run from him, the villagers who stoned him, 
and of his arrival at the cottagers’ hovel. 
“There I discovered greater hungers than that for 
food,” said the monster. “I discovered the hunger of the 

FACE TO FACE’ 99 
mind for /knowledge and the heart for love. The first 
hunger, I was able to satisfy in part. I learned to speak, 
to read, and to write.” 
As the monster recounted the whole of his experience 
with the cottagers, Frankenstein could not help being 
struck by the creature’s great intelligence. Imprisoned in 
the hideous head was a sensitive and capable intellect. 
How quickly he had learned! 
“But I learned also to love,” the monster went on, 
“and learned to need affection. I cannot describe to you 
the torments I felt on discovering my loathsome appear- 
ance and, from the notes in my pocket which you had 
written, the disgusting details of my creation. Love and 
affection? Who in all the world could give me these! But 
still I hoped,” said the monster bitterly. “Still my heart 
was gentle enough to hope that those kindly people who 
lived in the cottage would not turn me away.” 
As the monster went on to describe the agony of his 
final experiences with the cottagers, tears of bitterness 
and loss fell from his eyes. 
“Afterwards, cursing you, yet needing you, I traveled 
to Geneva,” said the monster. He told Frankenstein how 
he had saved the life of the little girl who had fallen into 
the river, and how he had been shot and wounded in 
return. 
Then the monster spoke of William and how the child 
had struggled, hurling words at him too terrible to bear. 
“T grasped his throat to silence him, and in a moment 
he lay at my feet,” said the monster. “It was an accident. 

FRANKENSTEIN 100 

FACE TO FACE 101 
I did not mean to hurt the child. But as I gazed at him, I 
felt triumphant in knowing that this act would bring you 
pain, that I, too, could torment as I had been tormented. 
Then as I fixed my eyes upon the child, I saw the locket, 
and taking it, examined the picture inside. The loveliness 
of the woman in the picture only reminded me once 
more of my own ugly form and the loneliness to which I 
was condemned. I left William then, and hid myself in a 
barn. There was a woman inside sleeping on some straw. 
She was young and beautiful. Here, I thought, is one of 
those whose heavenly smiles are given to all but me. And 
then I bent over her and whispered, ‘Awake fair lady, 
your lover is near—he who would give his life for one 
look of affection.’ 
“The sleeper stirred. A thrill of terror ran through me. 
What if she should really wake and see me and curse me 
and call me murderer? I did not know if William were 
alive or dead. The thought that she might waken and tell 
of my crime against William maddened me. Not I, I de- 
cided, but she shall suffer. The murder I may have com- 
mitted she shall pay for because I am kept from all that 
she could give me. Having learned from Felix how your 
human law works, I knew that she would be punished. I 
bent over her and placed the picture in her pocket. She 
moved again, and I fled. 
“For some days I haunted the spot where these things 
had taken place. Sometimes I wished to see you and 
sometimes wished to kill myself and be rid of my mis- 
eries. At last, | wandered toward these mountains and have 
“BL CAMINO COLLEGE LIBRARY 

102 FRANKENSTEIN 
remained here since, burning with a passion which you 
alone can satisfy.” 
The monster rose from his seat and lunged toward 
Frankenstein to grasp his shoulders. 
“We will not part,” the monster said, “I will not let 
you leave until you agree to my conditions. I am alone 
and miserable. Mankind refuses me its company. But if 
there were someone as deformed and horrible as myself, 
she would be my friend. My companion must be the 
same as I and have the same defects. Frankenstein, you 
must create this being.” 
The monster finished speaking and fixed his look upon 
Frankenstein in expectation of a reply. But Frankenstein 
was still too shocked by the monster’s request to answer, 
so the monster repeated, “You must create a female for 
me. I want a wife, a friend, to live with. Only you can do 
this, and I demand it of you as a right which you must 
not refuse.” 
The pity with which Frankenstein had listened to the 
first part of the monster’s tale had vanished at its ending. 
Rage burned within him again. 
“I do refuse,” Frankenstein replied. “No torture shall 
make me create another like yourself. Two such evil 
creatures as you might destroy the world! You may tor- 
ture me, but I will never consent.” 
“You are in the wrong,” replied the fiend, returning 
heavily to his seat. “But instead of threatening you, I will 
reason with you. I am malicious because I am miserable. 
Am I not shunned and hated by all men? You, my cre- 

FACE TO FACE 103 
ator, would tear me to pieces if you could. Remember 
that, and tell me why I should pity man more than he 
pities me. If any man were kind to me, for that per- 
son’s sake I would make peace with all men. But humans 
cannot help but hate me, and as I am proud, I will not 
simply accept this fate. I will revenge my injuries. If I 
- cannot inspire love, I will cause fear—especially toward 
you, my arch-enemy—because you created me and are 
responsible for my unhappiness. I will work at your de- 
struction until I break your heart and make you curse the 
hour of your birth!” 
As he spoke, a fiendish rage wrinkled his face into con- 
tortions too horrible for human eyes to behold, but he 
calmed himself and continued. 
“I intended to reason, not to grow angry. It is you who 
are the cause. I did not ask to be created. You created 
me and you must help me now. Since neither you nor 
any of your fellow-beings will be my friend, what I ask 
of you is surely reasonable and not so much to ask. I want a 
female creature as hideous as myself. It is not much, but it 
will make me content. It is true we shall be monsters, cut off 
from all the world. But that will only make us love each 
other more. Our lives will not be happy, but they will 
be harmless and free of the misery I feel. My creator, 
make me happy! Let me feel gratitude toward you for one 
kindly act. Let me see that one man at least feels sympathy 
for me. Do not deny me my request!” the monster pleaded. 
Frankenstein was moved. He shuddered when he 
thought of the possible results of his consent, but he felt 

104 FRANKENSTEIN 
that there was some justice in the monster’s argument. 
His tale, and the feelings he now expressed, proved him 
to be a creature of sensitivity. Did Frankenstein not owe 
his monster whatever happiness was in his power to give? 
The monster saw Frankenstein’s change of feeling, and 
continued, “If you consent, neither you nor any other 
human being shall ever see us again. I will go to the vast 
wilds of South America. My food is not that of man. I do 
not kill living creatures to satisfy my appetite. Acorns 
and berries are enough for me. My companion will be of 
the same nature as myself. We shall make our bed of 
dried leaves. The sun will shine on us as on men. The 
picture I present to you is peaceful and human, and you 
must feel that you could deny me only out of cruelty. 
Pitiless as you were before, I now see compassion in your 
eyes. Let me beg you to give me what I want so much.” 
“You say that you will leave the places where mankind 
lives,” replied Frankenstein, “to dwell in those wilds 
where the beasts will be your only companions. How can 
you, who long for the love and sympathy of man, keep 
your promise? You will return, and again seek their 
kindness and be hated. Your evil passions will return, 
and then there will be two of you to destroy us. I cannot 
do this. I cannot consent.” 
The monster lifted his scarred and hideous hands. 
“How changeable your feelings are! A moment ago you 
were ready to agree. Why do you once again harden 
your heart against me? I swear to you that, with my com- 
panion, I will quit the neighborhood of man and dwell in 

FACE TO FACE 105 
the most savage of places. My evil passions will have 
vanished, if I have a friend, for she will give me sympa- 
thy. My life will pass quietly, and in my dying moments, 
I shall not curse my maker.” 
His words had a strange effect upon Frankenstein. He 
pitied the monster and felt a wish to make him happy. 
But when Frankenstein gazed on the monster, when he 
saw the filthy mass that moved and talked, his heart 
sickened with horror and hatred. The monster was right. 
If even his creator could not bear the sight of him, no 
one could. This being so, Frankenstein felt he had no 
right to deny the monster the one sort of creature who 
would keep him company, a hideous living corpse like 
himself. 
“You swear,” Frankenstein said finally, “to be harm- 
less. But have you not already done enough evil to make 
me distrust you? Perhaps your wanting a companion is a 
trick so that you may have help in your destruction and 
revenge.” 
“Stop playing with me,” groaned the monster. “I de- 
mand an answer. I have already explained that it is my 
loneliness which makes me evil. With someone at my 
side, I shall no longer be alone and shall feel no more of 
that anger which makes me vengeful. I need only affec- 
tion, Frankenstein, to make me good.” 
Frankenstein paused for some time to think, to consid- 
er the monster’s argument. He thought of the monster’s 
early virtues, and the loathing and scorn which had 
changed virtue to evil. The monster’s power and threats 

106 FRANKENSTEIN 
he also considered. A creature who could exist in ice- 
caves and climb impossible cliffs was a being no human 
could cope with. The monster was a thing to be feared. 
Turning to the monster, therefore, Frankenstein re- 
plied, “I consent to your demand if you will really swear 
to leave Europe forever, and every other place where 
mankind lives, when I give you a female to accompany 
you in your exile.” 
“T swear,” cried the monster, “by the sun, and by the 
blue sky of heaven, and by the fire of love that burns my 
heart, that if you grant my prayer you shall never behold 
me again. Go to your home and begin your labors. I 
shall watch over you from afar, but do not be afraid. I 
will wait until you are ready and then I shall appear.” 
Saying this, the monster suddenly left the hut, fearful, 
perhaps, that Frankenstein might change his mind. 
Going to the door, Frankenstein watched the monster go 
down the mountain with greater speed than the flight of 
an eagle. Soon he was lost from view in the mists which 
hovered over the sea of ice. 
The monster’s tale had taken the whole day to tell. 
The sun was on the edge of the horizon when he left. 
Frankenstein knew that he ought to hurry down to the 
valley before darkness, but his heart was heavy and his 
steps slow. The difficulty of finding firm footing on the 
steep and twisting paths made his descent even slower, 
and night came upon him half way down. He sat on a 
rock to rest, and watched the clouds pass over the stars. 
In the strange, silent night his thoughts stirred wildly. 

FACE TO FACE 107 
“Oh, stars and clouds and winds,” he cried out, “you 
mock me! If you really pity me, crush me now into 
nothing and put an end to the terrible agony which 
hangs over my life.” 
But for answer, there was only silence. 
It was morning when Frankenstein reached the village 
of Chamonix. He took no rest, but returned immediately 
to Geneva. As soon as he entered his father’s house, he 
presented himself to the family. They were alarmed at 
Frankenstein’s haggard and wild appearance, but though 
they questioned him, he made no answer. He felt shut 
out from their love, from all sympathy, by the horrible 
task he had to perform. Though he must do it to save 
them, he felt too loathsome to be in their company. With 
an agonized look, he left them to shut himself alone in 
his room. 

“oJ 7 |e- 
The Monster's Wife 
THE MONSTER had been alive for nearly two years now. 
Days and weeks passed after Dr. Frankenstein’s return 
from Chamonix, and he could not get the thought of the 
monster or the promise he had made to him out of his 
mind. Still Dr. Frankenstein did not have the courage to 
begin his work. He feared the fiend’s revenge, but he 
could not overcome his loathing for the task he had to 
perform. 
Frankenstein knew that in order to create a wife for 
the monster, he would have to study again, and to reread 
many books as well as his own notes. He had heard of 
some discoveries made by an English philosopher which 
he thought might be helpful, and he often thought of vis- 
iting England to increase his knowledge. But he kept put-- 
ting the trip off, inventing every excuse he could think of 
to delay the start of his work. He even began to convince 
himself that maybe it was not necessary to start to work 
so quickly. 

THE MONSTER’S WIFE 109 
Then one day, Frankenstein’s father called him into 
the library for a talk. 
“T am glad to see your health improving, my son,” said 
Frankenstein’s father. “But you avoid your family and 
still you seem to be unhappy. For a long time I have 
wondered why, but now I have an idea.” 
Frankenstein gave his father a startled look and turned 
pale. 
But his father continued, “You are unhappy because 
of Elizabeth, aren’t you? You know that I have long 
wished for you and Elizabeth to marry. You grew up to- 
gether, studied together, and have always appeared suit- 
ed to one another. But perhaps you love her only as a 
sister. Perhaps you are in love with someone else. And I 
have wondered if the thought of disappointing my hopes 
for your marriage or hurting Elizabeth’s feelings is the 
cause of your unhappiness.” 
Frankenstein leaned against the fireplace mantle and 
smiled at his father in relief. His secret was still safe and 
he could, at least, make his father happy on the subject 
of Elizabeth. 
“My dear father,” Frankenstein said. “I love Elizabeth 
deeply and tenderly. She is the only woman I have ever 
wanted to be my wife. Thinking that I should one day 
marry Elizabeth has been my greatest joy. I cannot imag- 
ine life without her.” 
Frankenstein’s father glowed with pleasure: 
“You’ve made me very happy,” he said softly. “I know 
this house has been filled with gloom for these past 

110 FRANKENSTEIN 
months, and perhaps that is what makes you gloomy, 
too. But William is so much better now, and though we 
can never forget Justine, we must do what we can to 
create happiness in this house once more. Do you see 
any reason why you and Elizabeth should not be married 
immediately? You are young, but as you have your own 
fortune, | cannot imagine that an early marriage would 
interfere with any future plans you may have. Don’t 
think I want to tell you what to do, Victor. I only wish to 
hear, if you will confide in me, how you feel about 
marrying Elizabeth right away.” 
Frankenstein listened to his father in silence, and for a 
long time was unable to reply. So many thoughts came 
rapidly to his mind. Alas! To Frankenstein, the idea of 
marrying Elizabeth immediately was one of horror and 
dismay. He was bound by a solemn promise, which he 
had not yet fulfilled, and dared not break—lest his family 
be stricken with terror! How could he go through the 
gaieties of a wedding with this deadly weight hanging 
around his neck? He must perform his task and let the 
monster depart with his mate before he allowed himself 
the pleasure of marrying Elizabeth. 
Frankenstein remembered that he needed the Eng- 
lish professor’s knowledge and discoveries for his work. 
He could write letters for the information he needed, but 
that would be a long and difficult process. It would be 
easier and more satisfactory to make the journey to En- 
gland. Besides, Frankenstein could not bear the idea of 
doing his loathsome work in his father’s house. He knew 

THE MONSTER’S WIFE 111 
that a thousand fearful accidents might happen which 
would disclose his horrifying creation. He also knew that 
he would often lose all self-control and be unable to hide 
the frightful sensations which overcame him during such 
hideous tasks. He must leave the people he loved while 
he did this work. It would not take long. Finishing it 
would bring peace and happiness. With the promise ful- 
filled, the monster would depart forever. Or (and this 
Frankenstein never stopped hoping for) some accident 
might destroy the monster and put an end to Franken- 
stein’s slavery. 
These feelings made him reply to his father, “I would 
like first to journey to England. After that, Elizabeth and 
I will be married.” Concealing the true reason, Franken- 
stein gave several excuses for this journey, and his father 
was content. After such a long period of melancholy, his 
father thought a pleasure trip might do the young man 
good. 
“Go then,” said his father. “Stay a few months, even a 
year, and then come back to us happy and refreshed.” 
There was only one precaution his father and Eliz- 
abeth took about Frankenstein’s journey. As they were 
still worried about his health and his dark moods, they 
wanted Frankenstein to have a companion. They wrote 
to Henry Clerval. Clerval agreed to join Frankenstein at 
Strasburgh. 
To England, therefore, Frankenstein was bound. As he 
made arrangements for his journey, one feeling haunted 
him and made him afraid. During his absence, he would 

LA2 FRANKENSTEIN 
be leaving his family unaware of the existence of their 
enemy and unprotected from his attacks. Yet had the 
monster not promised to follow Frankenstein wherever 
he went? Might not the fiend accompany him to En- 
gland, force his presence on Frankenstein now and then to 
remind him of his promise and to watch over its progress? 
As awful as this idea was, at least it would mean the 
safety of his family, and Frankenstein hoped it might be 
so. Frankenstein’s other concern was Clerval. He needed 
solitude for his work. But for the first part of the journey, 
at least, it would be good to have Henry’s company. 
Clerval’s presence might even keep the monster at a 
distance, as well as Frankenstein’s own maddening 
thoughts. 
Late in September Frankenstein again left his native 
country. Elizabeth bid him a tearful farewell as Franken- 
stein entered into the carriage that was to take him away. 
It was bitter to him to leave, and bitterer still that he 
should have to pack up once again the chemical instru- 
ments he now detested. Filled with dreary imaginings, he 
rode through beautiful and majestic scenes, seeing noth- 
ing and thinking only of the terrible purpose of his trip. 
After traveling some days, he arrived at Strasburgh 
and waited for Henry Clerval. At last his friend arrived. 
“What a difference there is between us!” thought 
Frankenstein as he greeted his companion. “Henry is 
alive to the beauty of the world, while I am a miserable 
wretch, haunted by a curse that shuts off every path to 
enjoyment.” 

THE MONSTER’S WIFE 113 
The friends traveled by boat down the Rhine River to 
Rotterdam. It was a lovely voyage, and even Franken- 
stein took pleasure at the sight of the beautiful ruined 
castles set on tremendous cliffs, overlooking the dark 
Rhine. From Rotterdam, they proceeded by sea to 
England. It was on a clear morning, toward the end 
of December, that Frankenstein first saw the white cliffs 
of Britain, and, soon after, the steeples of London, with 
St. Paul’s Cathedral towering above all. 
The two men determined to spend several months in 
London, Clerval to enjoy himself and further his project 
to visit India, and Frankenstein, to seek the information 
necessary for his work. He spent long days and nights 
discussing various branches of science with England’s 
greatest natural philosophers. He had, besides, the most 
unpleasant task of all—to collect the materials for his new 
creation. Again he experienced the horror of gathering 
bones from charnel houses, disturbing the dead in their 
graves, choosing the necessary organs from dissecting 
rooms, and penetrating again the secrets of the human 
frame. It tortured Frankenstein to think for what purpose 
he packed so carefully all the parts of what was to be- 
come his second living corpse. 
In March, Frankenstein and Clerval left London to 
visit some friends at Perth in Scotland. To please Clerval, 
they made the journey slowly in order to view the lovely 
countryside and historical places of England. But as the 
journey came to an end, Frankenstein was not sorry. He 
had now neglected his promise for a long time, and he 

114 FRANKENSTEIN 
feared the results of the demon’s disappointment. The 
demon might have, after all, remained in Switzerland 
and even now be taking his revenge on Frankenstein’s 
family. Frankenstein waited for their letters with feverish 
impatience. He was also worried about Henry. If the 
fiend had followed them, might he not take out his anger 
in attacking Henry? 
Suddenly Frankenstein did not dare put off his work 
any longer. When they arrived in Perth, Frankenstein 
said, 
“Henry, do not ask me why, I beg you, but I must be 
alone for a short time. You stay here with our friends, 
while I go north through Scotland by myself. I may be 
gone a month or two, but promise not to follow me or 
try to stop me. Leave me in peace and solitude for a little 
while, and when I return, I hope it will be with a lighter 
heart and a happy mood to match your own.” 
“Only write to me and let me know that you are all 
right and I will do as you ask,” replied Henry. “Please 
don’t be gone too long, my friend. I shall miss you.” 
Having parted from Henry, Frankenstein determined 
to go to the loneliest spot he could find in Scotland and 
finish his work in solitude. He was certain, suddenly, that 
the monster had followed him and would appear when 
the work was finished to receive his companion. 
Frankenstein packed his instruments and the crates 
with their hideous contents and crossed the northern 
highlands. He had decided on one of the Orkney islands, 
five miles off shore, as the scene of his labors. It was a 

THE MONSTER’S WIFE 115 
place fitted for such a work, being hardly more than a 
rock, whose high sides were continually beaten by the 
waves. The barren soil scarcely supported the five per- 
sons who lived on the island, and in the whole place 
there were only three huts. One of these was empty when 
Frankenstein arrived, and he arranged to rent it. 
The hut had only two rooms. It was dirty. Part of the 
roof had fallen in, the walls were unplastered, and the 
door was off its hinges. Frankenstein ordered the hut to 
be repaired, bought some furniture and food—all of 
which had to be sent for from the mainland. So poor 
were the islanders that they asked no questions. They re- 
ceived the food and clothes Frankenstein gave them and 
left him alone. He lived, therefore, ungazed at and un- 
molested while he began his work. 
At first, he worked only in the morning. In the after- 
noon, he walked on the stony beach of the sea, to listen 
to the waves as they roared and dashed at his feet. It was 
a monotonous, desolate and depressing scene. 
After he had been on the island some time, however, 
his routine changed. As he proceeded in his work, it 
became every day more horrible to him. Sometimes he 
could not make himself enter his laboratory for several 
days in a row. At other times, he toiled day and night in 
order to complete the work. It was, indeed, a filthy proc- 
ess in which he was engaged. 
During his first experiment, nearly three years before, 
a kind of enthusiastic frenzy had blinded him to the hor- 
ror of what he was doing. But this time, he went to it in 

116 FRANKENSTEIN 
cold blood, and his heart often sickened at the work of 
his hands. 
All alone, employed in the most detestable occupation, 
his nerves grew strained. Every moment he feared to 
meet his persecutor. Sometimes, he sat with his eyes fixed 
on the ground, terrified that if he raised them, his glance 
would meet with the thing he dreaded most to see. But 
he worked on, and as his creation began to take shape, 
he began to feel hope. Yet even his hope was mixed with 
strange forebodings of evil that made him sick inside. 
One evening, Frankenstein was in his laboratory. The 
sun had set and the moon was just rising above the sea. 
He paused for a while to decide whether he should leave 
his labor or work through the night. to bring it closer to 
the end. As he sat, his thoughts were in a turmoil. 
“What am I doing?” he asked himself for the thou- 
sandth time. “Three years ago I created a fiend whose 
cruelty has ruined my life and filled my heart with the bit- 
terest remorse. And now I am about to complete another 
being whose spirit I know nothing about.” 
Frankenstein gazed at the huge form stretched before 
him on the table. It was a creature equally as hideous as 
the first. It had the same yellow skin which, though it cov- 
ered the muscles and arteries beneath, was nevertheless 
wrinkled. It had the same black, flowing hair, though 
longer and curled. There were the same large white 
teeth, the watery eyes, and the straight black lips. The 
only difference was in the form of the body, which was 
female instead of male. 

THE MONSTER’S WIFE 117 
“But is that the only difference?” cried Frankenstein in 
an agony of despair. “My God! She might become ten 
thousand times more evil than her mate, and delight, for 
its own sake, in murder and destruction. He has sworn to 
leave the neighborhood of man and hide himself in 
deserts. But she has not. And she, who in all probability, 
will become a thinking, a reasoning creature, might refuse 
to agree to a promise made before her creation.” 
Frankenstein gazed again at his new creation and 
shuddered at its ugliness. 
“They might even hate each other,” he thought. “The 
monster who lives now already loathes his deformity. 
Might he not detest such ugliness even more when it 
comes before his eyes in female form? She might also 
turn in disgust from him to the superior beauty of man. 
She might leave him. Then he would again be alone and 
deserted, even angrier than before at being left by one of 
his own kind.” 
Frankenstein trembled with despair as he then thought 
about the worst possibility of all. 
“Suppose they do leave Europe together and go to the 
other side of the world. Suppose the opposite feelings 
occur and they like each other. Great heaven! They would 
then want children, and a race of devils would be born 
upon the earth to threaten the very existence of man- 
kind. Do I have the right, in saving my own family, to 
inflict this curse upon the human race?” 
Frankenstein had once been moved by the monster’s 
arguments. He had been struck senseless by the mon- 

118 FRANKENSTEIN 
ster’s fiendish threats to his family. But now, for the first 
time, the wickedness of his promise burst upon him. He 
shuddered to think that future ages might curse him, 
whose selfishness had not hesitated to buy its own peace 
at the price, perhaps, of the existence of the entire 
human race. 
Frankenstein shook and his heart nearly stopped 
when, suddenly, as he looked up, he saw, by the light of 
the moon, the monster at the window. A ghastly grin 
wrinkled his lips as he gazed on Frankenstein and then 
on the form stretched upon the laboratory table. He 
clasped his hands and his mouth opened as if he were 
laughing. . 
Yes, he had followed Frankenstein in his travels. He 
had moved through forests, hid himself in caves, and 
taken refuge in wild, deserted heaths. 
“Now,” realized Frankenstein, “he has come to mark 
my progress and claim the fulfillment of my promise.” 
As Frankenstein looked at the monster, it seemed to 
him that the monster’s face expressed malice and treach- 
ery. Frankenstein thought, with a sensation of mad- 
ness, how he had promised to create another just the 
same. He gazed once more in horror at the monster’s face 
pressed against the glass and strode to his work table. 
Trembling with passion, Frankenstein tore to. pieces 
the thing he had created. Frankenstein knew that he was 
watched as he destroyed the creature upon whom the 
monster had built his hopes for happiness, and he heard 
the wretch howl in devilish despair and revenge. 

THE MONSTER’S WIFE 119 

120 FRANKENSTEIN 
Frankenstein left the laboratory and, locking the door, 
made a solemn vow never to begin such work again. 
Then, with trembling steps, he went into the next room. 
He was alone. None were near him to cheer his gloom or 
comfort his sickening depression and terrible thoughts. 
Several hours passed. Frankenstein stood at his window 
gazing on the sea. It was almost motionless, for the winds 
were hushed, and all nature slept under the eye of the 
quiet moon. Only a few fishing vessels specked the water, 
and now and then the breeze carried the sound of voices, 
as the fishermen called to one another. All was absolute- 
ly silent until he suddenly heard the sound of paddling 
oars near the shore and someone landing close to the 
house. 
A moment later, the door creaked. Frankenstein tried 
to call for help, but he was overcome by the sensation of 
helplessness so often felt in frightful dreams when one 
cannot fly from danger and remains rooted to the spot. 
The door opened, and the wretch appeared. 
“You have destroyed the work which you began,” he 
said hoarsely. “Why?-Do you dare to break your promise? 
I have endured misery. I left Switzerland with you. I 
crept along the shores of the Rhine. I have dwelt many 
months in the forests of England and in the heaths of 
Scotland. I have been tired and cold and hungry. Do you 
dare destroy An) hopes?” 
“Go away,” shouted Frankenstein. “Never will I create 
another like yourself. Never will I make another as 
deformed and wicked as you.” 

THE MONSTER’S WIFE 12] 
“Slave!” spoke the monster. “Before, I reasoned with 
you. I will not reason again! Remember how powerful I 
am. You think you are miserable now, but I can make 
you so miserable that even the light of day will be hate- 
ful to you. You are my creator, but I am your master. 
Obey!” 
“Never!” Frankenstein cried. “No matter how great 
your power is, no threats will ever make me create a 
companion in evil for you. I cannot loose another demon 
upon the earth. Go! I will never change my mind.” 
The monster saw Frankenstein’s determination and 
gnashed his teeth in rage. “Shall each man,” he cried, 
“have a wife and I be alone? I once had feelings of affec- 
tion, but no more. From now on, your hours will pass in 
dread and misery, and soon the thing will happen to take 
your happiness away from you forever. Are you to be 
happy while I grovel in my wretchedness? You can blast 
my other passions, but revenge remains. I may die. But 
first you, my tyrant and tormentor, shall curse the sun 
that gazes on your misery. Beware! For I am fearless, 
and therefore powerful. You will repent of your cruelty, 
Frankenstein, I warn you!” 
“Devil, be quiet. Do not poison the air with your mal- 
ice,” said Frankenstein. “I have told you my decision, 
and I am no coward to bend to your words. Leave me. I 
shall never change my mind.” 
The monster raised his huge, scarred hand. 
“Very well, I will go,” he cried. “But remember, I shall 
be with you on your wedding night.” 

122 FRANKENSTEIN 
Frankenstein leaped forward in an attempt to attack 
the monster. “Monster!” he exclaimed. “Before you 
threaten me with death, be sure you are safe yourself!” 
But the monster easily got away from Frankenstein 
and ran out of the house. In a few moments, Franken- 
stein saw him in his boat, which shot across the waters 
with an arrowy swiftness and was soon lost amid the 
waves. 
All was again silent. But the monster’s words rang in 
Frankenstein’s ears, and he burned with rage. Pacing up 
and down the room, Frankenstein conjured up a thou- 
sand tormenting images. How he wished he could have 
killed the monster! Frankenstein shuddered to think who 
might be the next victim sacrificed to the monster’s re- 
venge. Then he thought again of the monster’s words. 
“I will be with you on your wedding night.” 
So that was to be the moment of Frankenstein’s death! 
That was the hour in which he was to die at the mon- 
ster’s hands. Frankenstein had no fear for himself. But 
he sorrowed for his lovely Elizabeth, when she should 
find her lover dead, snatched from her arms by the mon- 
ster in his vengeful malice. As Frankenstein thought of 
Elizabeth’s endless grief and sorrow, he vowed not to fall 
before his enemy without a bitter struggle. | 
The night passed and the sun rose from the ocean. 
Frankenstein’s feelings grew calmer, as the violence of 
rage sank low into the depths of despair. He left the 
house, the horrid scene of the night’s conflict, and 
walked on the beach. He wished he could pass his life on 

THE MONSTER’S WIFE 123 
that barren rock, because he knew that his return to the 
world would mean his own death or the death of those 
he most loved by a demon whom he himself had created. 
Frankenstein walked about the island like a restless 
spectre. Toward noon he lay down on the beach and 
slept. In the evening when he awoke, he saw a fishing 
boat land close by, and one of the men brought him a 
packet of letters. Some were from Geneva. One letter 
was from Clerval. It said that Henry was soon to leave 
for India and asked that Frankenstein please join him for 
his last few days in England. This letter recalled Fran- 
kenstein to life, and he decided to leave the island. 
Yet before he left, there was a task to perform, the 
thought of which made him shudder. He must pack up 
his chemical instruments. To do that, he would have to 
enter his laboratory again, the scene of his odious work. 
The next morning at daybreak, he unlocked the labo- 
ratory door. The remains of the half-finished creature, 
which he had destroyed, lay scattered on the floor. Fran- 
kenstein almost felt as if he had mangled the living flesh 
of a human being. He picked his way carefully through 
the filthy mess and collected his instruments. Then he 
reflected that he had better not leave the remains of his 
work to horrify the islanders. He found a large basket 
into which he put the pieces of the corpse, together with 
some heavy stones, so that the basket would sink into the 
sea. Frankenstein carried everything to the beach and 
sat, cleaning and arranging his instruments, to wait for 
the night to come. 

124 FRANKENSTEIN 
Between two and three o’clock in the morning, the 
moon rose. He put his instruments and the basket aboard 
a small skiff and sailed out about four miles from shore. 
The scene was perfectly solitary. At one point, a thick 
cloud hid the moon. Frankenstein took advantage of the 
moment of darkness to throw the basket into the sea. He 
listened to the gurgling sound as it sank, and then sailed 
away. 
A few moments later, the sky grew more clouded. The 
wind, from the northeast, was high, and the waves began 
to threaten the safety of the skiff. The wind drove him 
farther and farther from the coast. He tried to change 
course, but the boat began to fill with water and he 
dared not try again. His only choice was to drive before 
the wind. He had no compass and no idea where he was 
going. Was he to sail into the wide Atlantic and be lost? 
“In that case, the monster will be cheated of killing 
me,” he exclaimed. “Will he not then take his revenge on 
my family, my friends?” 
This thought plunged Frankenstein into a desperate 
mood. He looked at the heavens, which were covered by 
clouds that flew before the wind, only to be replaced by 
others. He looked upon the sea, which might well be his 
grave. 
Hours passed. At last the wind died away into a gentle 
breeze and the sea became free from breakers. Suddenly 
he saw a line of high land toward the south. He steered 
eagerly toward the wild and rocky coast, and sailed along 
it until he found the harbor of a town. 

THE MONSTER’S WIFE 125 
People crowded to stare at him as he arranged his 
sails, but no one greeted him and no one offered help. 
Hearing them speak English to one another, Franken- 
stein addressed them in that language. 
“My good friends,” he said, “will you be so kind as to 
tell me where I am?” 
“You will know that soon enough,” said a man. “And 
you may not like it, either.” 
Frankenstein was surprised to hear so rude a reply, 
and to see nothing but anger on the faces of the people 
gathering around him. 
“Why do you answer me so roughly?” he asked. “The 
English are not inhospitable to strangers.” 
“I don’t know the customs of the English,” answered 
the man. “But here in Ireland, we don’t like murderers!” 
“TJ do not understand you,” said Frankenstein, moving 
forward onto the dock. 
“You will soon,” the man said roughly. “You will have 
to come with me to Mr. Kirwin, the magistrate.” 
“But why?” cried Frankenstein. 
“To give an account of the death of a gentleman who 
was found murdered here last night,” said the man. 
Frankenstein accompanied the man without protest, 
knowing perfectly well that he was innocent. Little did 
he expect the calamity, the horror that was to overwhelm 
him. 
In the magistrate’s office, half a dozen men came for- 
ward to give evidence. They had been out fishing. A 
strong northerly blast made them decide to return to 

126 FRANKENSTEIN 
port. In the dark, as they walked along the sands, they 
had come upon the body of a handsome young man, 
about twenty-five years old. He had apparently been 
strangled. There were the black marks of fingers on his 
neck. 
Frankenstein barely listened to the first part of the 
tale, but when the mark of fingers was mentioned, he 
thought of William, and went pale. 
Then another fisherman swore he had seen a boat with 
a single man in it not far from shore, the same boat, he 
thought, in which Frankenstein had landed. 
A woman, who lived near the beach, testified that the 
night before, she had seen a man come onto the beach in 
a boat and then push off again. 
The fishermen were agreed that in all probability, 
Frankenstein had left the body on the beach and, be- 
cause of the storm, could not get away from shore. He 
had beaten about on the sea all night and had, this very 
morning, been obliged to land again. 
Mr. Kirwin, on hearing this evidence, desired that 
Frankenstein should be taken into the room where the 
body lay, in order to see what effect it would produce. 
Frankenstein entered the room where the corpse lay and 
was taken near the coffin. As he gazed down, his tongue 
grew parched with horror, his eyes stared wildly, and he 
trembled in every limb. What he saw, stretched out life- 
less before him, was the body of Henry Clerval! 
Frankenstein gasped for breath and threw himself on 
the body. 

THE MONSTER’S WIFE 127 
“Have my murderous experiments deprived you also 
of life, my dearest Henry?” Frankenstein cried out. “I 
have already hurt one and destroyed another. Other vic- 
tims await their destiny. But you, Clerval, my dearest 
friend—” 
Frankenstein could bear the agony no longer, and he 
was carried out of the room in strong convulsions. 
For two months, he lay in a fever, on the point of 
death, raving about William, Justine, and Clerval. He 
dreamed he felt the fingers of the monster already grasp- 
ing his own neck, and screamed aloud with agony and 
terror. He wanted to die, to escape the nightmare of his 
life. 
But Frankenstein was doomed to live, and in two 
months the fever left him. He awoke surrounded by jail- 
ers, turnkeys, bolts, and the bars of a prison. His first 
thought was of the safety of his family. Was there a new 
murder for him to lament? Had the monster wreaked 
more destruction while Frankenstein had been sick? 
“Your family is perfectly well,” said Mr. Kirwin, visit- 
ing Frankenstein in his dungeon. “I found some letters in 
your pockets while you were ill and wrote to your father. 
He has come to visit you.” 
In his father’s presence, and after the excellent medical 
care Mr. Kirwin had provided, Frankenstein soon grew 
well. But he was sunk in a terrible gloom which nothing 
could help. 
“My poor son,” murmured his father. “You traveled to 
seek happiness, but a terrible fate seems to pursue you.” 

128 FRANKENSTEIN 
“Alas, yes, my father,” replied Frankenstein. “A 
cursed destiny hangs over my head, which I must live to 
fulfill. Otherwise, I would have died over the coffin of 
my poor friend.” 
A month later, Frankenstein was tried for the murder 
of Henry Clerval. It had been discovered, however, that 
on the night of the murder, Frankenstein was still on the 
Orkney Islands. He was acquitted and freed immediately 
from prison. 
His father wished him to rest longer, but Frankenstein 
wanted desperately to get back to Geneva. His own life 
was poisoned forever, but with his protection, the lives of 
Elizabeth, Ernest, William, and his father might be 
saved. He might still find a way to destroy the monster, 
end its hideous life and even more hideous soul. 

“2 8 [e- 
The Doctor's Wedding 
FRANKENSTEIN and his father left Ireland, traveling with- 
out pause until they came to Paris. There Frankenstein, 
still weak from his illness, had to stop for rest. His father 
urged him to see people, to enjoy himself, but Franken- 
stein felt he had no right to share in the delights of his 
fellow beings. He had unchained an enemy among them, 
whose joy it was to shed their blood. How people would 
hate him if they knew of his unhallowed acts and the 
crimes which had their source in him alone. 
“Father, leave me be,” said Frankenstein. “William, 
Justine, Henry—all were attacked by my hand.” 
His father had often heard Frankenstein say this, but 
thought these wild accusations were the result of his son’s 
fever. He therefore asked for no explanation, and Fran- 
kenstein gave him none. He continued to maintain si- 
lence about the wretch he had created, knowing that the 
world would consider him mad. Besides, what was the 
point in bringing deep fear and unnatural horror to his 
father’s heart. 

130 FRANKENSTEIN 
“Please don’t say such things again,” his father begged. 
“Your imagination—” 
“You think I am mad,” cried Frankenstein. “But the 
sun and the heavens, who have seen my operations, can 
bear witness that I tell the truth. I am the murderer of 
those innocent victims. A thousand times would I have 
shed my own blood, drop by drop, to have saved their 
lives. But I could not, my father! Indeed, I could not 
sacrifice the whole human race.” 
The end of this speech convinced Frankenstein’s father 
that his son was deranged, and he shook his head sadly 
and changed the subject. He did not let Frankenstein 
speak of those things again. 
As the weeks passed, Frankenstein grew calmer in his 
manner and less violent in his speech. A few days before 
they were to leave Paris, he received the following letter 
from Elizabeth:— 
“My Dear Victor,—I am so happy to know that you 
are as near as Paris and that I may hope to see you 
soon. I have spent such a miserable winter, worrying 
about you. It has been a year and a half since you left 
Geneva, and we have all missed you so much. 
“I am only worried that the miserable feelings you 
went away with are still with you now, perhaps even 
worsened by your misfortunes. I do not like to disturb 
you when you have so much on your mind, but I feel I 
must tell you something before we meet again and explain 
something which may ease you. 
“We both know, Victor, that our marriage has been 
your parents’ favorite plan since our childhood. We were 
told this when we were young and were taught to look 

THE DOCTOR’S WEDDING 131 
forward to it. We have always been playmates and good 
friends to each other, but it is possible that this brotherly 
affection is all you feel toward me. Tell me, dearest 
Victor, do you not love another woman and was this 
the cause of your misery? 
“You have traveled and been away many years. When 
you came back from Ingolstadt and I saw you so un- 
happy, I confess that I thought it was because you loved 
someone else but did not want to hurt me or your father. 
But that was false reasoning, my dear friend. You cannot 
throw away all chance of happiness to do your duty. 
And it would make me miserable to think you married 
me simply for the sake of honor. 
“I confess to you, dear Victor, that I love you with 
all my heart. I wish only for your happiness. Do not 
answer this letter if it gives you pain. Only be happy 
and remember that I am your friend. 
ELIZABETH” 
The letter revived in Frankenstein’s memory what he 
had not thought of for a while, the threat of the fiend—“T 
will be with you on your wedding night.” Such was Fran- 
kenstein’s death sentence, and on that night the fiend 
would kill him, tear him away from the glimpse of hap- 
piness that promised partly to console his sufferings. On 
that night, the monster would end his crimes with Fran- 
kenstein’s death. 
“So be it,’ thought Frankenstein. “If he wins the 
struggle, I shall be at peace. If I win, I shall be a free 
man once more. Either way, his power over me will be 
at an end. 
Sweet, lovely Elizabeth, thought Frankenstein, as he 
read and reread her letter. Softened feelings of joy stole 

132 FRANKENSTEIN 
into Frankenstein’s heart which dared to whisper dreams 
of love and joy—yet his fate had been decided long ago. 
He wondered how quickly they ought to be married. 
The sooner their marriage, the sooner Frankenstein 
would die. But if he put the wedding off, the monster 
might in the meantime find other means to take his re- 
venge. He had vowed to be with Frankenstein on his 
wedding night, yet he had not waited to shed blood and 
had killed Henry Clerval. There was no point in delay- 
ing. Marrying Elizabeth would make her and his father 
happy, and Frankenstein was not afraid to die. 
He returned with his father to Geneva. Elizabeth was 
waiting. Frankenstein held out his arms and Elizabeth 
flew into them with tears in her eyes. 
“How silly of you to think even for a moment that I 
didn’t love you,” said Frankenstein. “All the happiness I 
hope for is centered in you. It is true that I have a secret 
which makes me miserable. I will tell you about it after 
we are married. But it has nothing to do with my love for 
you. Let us be married as soon as possible.” 
Their marriage was set to take place in ten days. Fran- 
kenstein had moments of tranquility, but these were 
often swept away by memories of what had happened. 
Memory brought madness, sometimes fits of rage and 
sometimes the quiet of despair. Elizabeth alone had the 
power to soothe him and to remind him of the joy they 
would find in marriage. — 
If for one instant Frankenstein had thought what 
might be the hellish intention of his fiendish enemy, he 

THE DOCTOR’S WEDDING 133 
would rather have banished himself forever from his na- 
tive country, and wandered a friendless outcast over the 
earth, than have consented to this marriage. But the 
monster had blinded Frankenstein to his real intentions 
in making him prepare only for his own death. 
As the day fixed for his marriage drew nearer, Fran- 
kenstein felt his heart sink within him. But he concealed 
his feelings as well as he could in order that his family 
might be gay and happy at the coming event. 
All preparations for the wedding were made. They 
were to spend their honeymoon on the shores of Lake 
Como at the Villa Lavenze, which had once belonged to 
Elizabeth’s family and had now been restored to her. In 
the meantime, Frankenstein took every precaution to de- 
fend himself, in case the fiend should openly attack him. 
He carried pistols and a dagger constantly about him, 
and was always on the watch to prevent any trickery. He 
felt so well prepared that he began to be calm, even to 
wonder whether the monster’s threat was not just a 
dream. Elizabeth’s happiness made him happy, and soon 
the day came when the marriage was to take place. 
The marriage ceremony was performed peacefully in 
the Frankenstein house. Afterward, there was a large 
party, but Elizabeth and Frankenstein slipped away and 
began their journey to Lake Como. It was a beautiful 
day, with the sun warm and the air clear. As they trav- 
eled together, Frankenstein experienced the last moments 
of happiness of his life. He held Elizabeth’s hand, and 
together they gazed upon the shining, snowy Alps, the 

134 FRANKENSTEIN 
mighty Jura mountains, and the clear waters of the rivers 
and lakes. 
“Be happy, Victor,” smiled Elizabeth. “How beautiful 
the world is!” 
Toward sundown, they came to Evian, on the eastern 
shore of Lake Geneva, where they were to pass their first 
night before going on to Lake Como. It was eight o’clock 
when they arrived, and they walked for a short time on 
the shore of the lake in the fading light to view the lovely 
scene of water, woods, and mountains. The wind, which 
had fallen in the south, now rose with great violence in 
the west. The moon had reached its summit in the heav- 
ens and was beginning to descend. The clouds swept 
across the sky and restless waves rose upon the lake. No 
sooner had they returned to the inn than a heavy rainstorm 
began. 
Frankenstein had been calm during the day, but now 
the night and the storm made a thousand fears come to 
his mind. At every noise, his hand grasped the pistol 
which was hidden in his pocket, He was terrified, but he 
resolved not to let his life go without a struggle. 
Elizabeth watched him in timid and fearful silence, but 
after awhile she said, “Victor, what is it that worries you 
so? What do you fear?” 
“Hush, hush, my love,” Frankenstein replied. “After 
tonight, all will be well. But this night I am filled with 
dread.” 
Frankenstein spent an hour in this state of mind. Then 
he thought how terrible it would be for Elizabeth to see 

THE DOCTOR’S WEDDING 135 
the battle he knew was coming, and he begged her to go 
upstairs to bed. 
“Pil come in a little while,” he persuaded her. “It 
won't be long now.” 
Elizabeth obeyed him. When she had gone, Franken- 
stein walked up and down the halls of the inn in an at- 
tempt to find his enemy. He looked into every corner 
that might provide a hiding place, but could find no 
. trace of the monster. 
He was just beginning to wonder if some fortunate 
chance had ruined the demon’s plans, when suddenly he 
heard a shrill and dreadful scream. It came from the 
room in which Elizabeth had gone to bed. As Franken-. 
stein heard the scream, the whole truth rushed into his 
mind, and for an instant he remained motionless with 
agony. The scream came again, and he rushed upstairs 
and into Elizabeth’s room. 
There she was, motionless, thrown across the bed, her 
bridal bed, with her head hanging down and her pale 
face half covered by her hair. Frankenstein rushed to her 
and took her in his arms. As he smoothed her hair back, 
he saw that her eyes were closed and her mouth slightly 
open, as if she were gasping for air. Her body was cold, 
and on her neck were the marks, beginning to blacken, 
of those huge and hideous fingers. He realized at once 
that Elizabeth was dead. 
“Elizabeth,” Frankenstein groaned. “Oh, my dearest 
Elizabeth, what have I done to you?” 
While he still bent over Elizabeth in agony, he hap- 

136 FRANKENSTEIN 
pened to look up. The windows of the room had before 
been darkened, and he felt a kind of panic on seeing the 
pale yellow light of the moon illuminate the chamber. 
The shutters had been thrown back, and with a sensation 
of horror, he saw at the open window a figure, the loath- 
some abhorred monster. A grin was on the monster’s 
black, wrinkled lips, and with a fiendish finger, he 
pointed to the senseless Elizabeth. Frankenstein rushed 
toward the window and, drawing out his pistol, fired. But 
the monster escaped, leaped from the window, and run- 
ning with the swiftness of lightning, plunged into the 
lake. 
Elizabeth’s screams before, and now the sound of the 
pistol, brought the inn people to the bedroom door. They 
knocked to be let in. Frankenstein opened the door and 
showed the men the spot where the attacker had disap- 
peared. They searched all night, some groups on the 
water, casting nets, and others searching through the 
woods and about the countryside. It was hopeless. They 
found no one. 
Bewildered by such horror, Frankenstein’s head 
whirled round and his steps were like those of a drunken 
man, as he returned to Elizabeth’s room. There she lay, 
his lovely Elizabeth, dead—murdered! Why hadn’t Fran- 
kenstein guessed whom the monster meant to attack? 
“As I destroyed his wife,” cried Frankenstein, “so he 
destroyed mine!” | | 
In an agony of despair, he threw himself on Eliz- 
abeth’s body and wept. Would his misfortunes never end? 

THE DOCTOR’S WEDDING 137 

138 FRANKENSTEIN 
The fiend had snatched from him every hope of future 
happiness. What more could happen! 
Yet what of his father, of Ernest, of little Wilham? 
Would the monster now attack the rest of his family, one 
by one? Frankenstein had to get back to Geneva. Dash- 
ing from the room, he ordered horses and a carriage for 
the following day. 
He arrived in Geneva that night, just before the gates 
were closed. Frankenstein raced into the house. Ernest 
still lived. But his father, having received news of Eliz- 
abeth’s death, could no longer support the horrors of his 
life. A few hours before Frankenstein’s arrival, he had 
died. The cursed demon had claimed another victim! 
Wild with anger and remorse, grief for his father and 
Elizabeth, Frankenstein nearly went mad. He was now 
possessed by a rage so violent, a hatred so intense, that 
he thought of nothing but to take revenge on the mon- 
ster, the vile demon who was destroying his family. 
This time, however, Frankenstein did not confine him- 
self to useless wishes to punish the monster. He wanted 
the monster within his grasp. To capture him, Franken- 
stein knew he would need help. At long last, he decided 
to do what he had never been able to bring himself to do 
before—to tell his story publicly and ask for the help of 
the police. 
Frankenstein went to the magistrate’s office. The mag- 
istrate, Mr. Zucker, aware of the importance of the 
Frankenstein family and sympathetic with their recent 
tragedies, greeted his visitor with courtesy and attention. 

THE DOCTOR’S WEDDING 139 
“Do sit down, Dr. Frankenstein,” said the magistrate. 
“Only tell me what I can do for you, and I shall be glad 
to be of assistance.” 
“Thank you, Mr. Zucker,” said Frankenstein. He 
looked directly at the magistrate’s face and said slowly, 
“I have an accusation to make. I know who is destroying 
my family. I shall need all the help it is in your authority 
to give in order to catch him.” 
“Be assured, sir, that I shall spare no effort to find the 
attacker,” answer the magistrate. “Do sit down, sir.” 
Frankenstein had been pacing up and down the magis- 
trate’s office as he spoke. 
“Thank you,” said Frankenstein. But he continued, in 
his agitation, to walk about. “Listen, then, to a story so 
strange that I hardly dare hope you will believe it. And 
yet, remember, as I speak, that I have no motive for 
lying and that I swear everything I am about to tell you 
is the truth. You will see, I hope, that the story is too 
connected to be mistaken for a dream.” 
His decision to pursue his enemy to the death had 
quieted his agony and enabled him to speak of these 
matters without raving wildly at every word. 
He told the magistrate the history of the past seven 
and a half years, from the time he had first left Geneva 
for the University of Ingolstadt to study natural science. 
He spoke of his discoveries, his experiments, his incred- 
ible creation, and the catastrophes that followed, with 
firmness and precision, marking the dates with accuracy 
and keeping his speech free of curses and raging. 

140 FRANKENSTEIN 
As he spoke, Frankenstein saw that Mr. Zucker ap- 
peared at first totally disbelieving and then, after a while, 
attentive and interested. Sometimes Frankenstein saw 
him shudder with horror, at other times look surprised, 
yet believing. 
When Frankenstein had finished his tale, he added, 
“This is the being whom I accuse, and for whose seizure 
and punishment I call on you to exert your whole power. 
It is your duty as a magistrate. I believe and hope that 
your human fears and revulsion will not prevent you 
from performing your duty.” 
These words caused a great change in the magistrate’s 
expression. He had listened to Frankenstein’s story with 
that half-belief people bring to tales of the supernatural, 
but when he was called upon to act officially, the whole 
tide of his disbelief returned. 
However, he answered mildly. Pushing back his chair 
with a sigh and a wave of his hand, Mr. Zucker rose and 
walked over to the window where Frankenstein stood. 
“T would willingly give you help in your pursuit,” said 
the magistrate. “But the creature of whom you speak ap- 
pears to have powers which make him impossible to 
catch. Who can follow a creature who can cross a sea of 
ice at such speeds and live in caves and dens where no 
man would dare go?” Mr. Zucker shrugged. “Besides, it 
has been some time since his last crime, and no one 
knows to what place he-may have wandered, or what 
region he may now inhabit.” 
Frankenstein turned sharply to face the magistrate. 

THE DOCTOR’S WEDDING 141 
“I do not doubt that he hovers near the spot where I 
live. But if he has indeed taken refuge in the Alps, he 
may be hunted like the mountain deer, and destroyed as 
a beast of prey. But I understand your thoughts. You do 
not believe my story. And you do not intend to pursue 
my enemy with the punishment which he deserves.” 
As Frankenstein spoke, rage sparkled in his eyes and 
he frightened Mr. Zucker. 
“You are mistaken,” said the magistrate. “I will try, 
and if it is in my power to seize the monster, be assured 
that he will suffer punishment for his crimes. But I fear, 
from what you yourself have said about him, that no 
matter how hard we try, we shall never find him. I am 
afraid, therefore, that you must make up your mind to 
be disappointed.” 
“That cannot be!” cried Frankenstein. “But I see that 
it does not matter what I say. My revenge does not mat- 
ter to you. I know that revenge is a vice, but I confess 
that it has become the devouring and only passion of my 
soul. My rage is unspeakable when I think that the mon- 
ster is still alive, that this monster I let loose upon the 
world still exists. You will not or cannot help me. There 
is only one thing for me to do—and that is to devote 
myself, either in life or death, to his destruction.” 
The Genevan magistrate stared at Frankenstein as if 
he were insane. He tried to soothe Frankenstein as if he 
were a child and again treated his story as if it were the 
result of a nightmare. 
“You do not understand,” cried Frankenstein in a 

142 FRANKENSTEIN 
frenzy. “In your ignorance, you do not even know what 
you are saying!” 
At this, Frankenstein broke from the magistrate’s office 
and ran out of the building, angry and disturbed. He 
would have to think of another way. 

“oJ 9 [e- 
Final Revenge 
FRANKENSTEIN’S POWERS of reasoning were swallowed up 
and lost in his fury. Revenge alone gave him strength. It 
shaped his feelings and allowed him to be calculating 
and calm, when otherwise madness or death would have 
been his fate. 
His first decision was to leave Geneva forever, or for 
as long as it took to track the monster down. His parents 
both dead, Elizabeth horribly murdered, he left William 
in Ernest’s care. Providing himself with some money, to- 
gether with a few jewels which had belonged to his 
mother, Frankenstein departed on his wanderings, which 
were to cease, if need be, only with his death. Where he 
was to travel, over what vast portions of the earth, he did 
not know. He did not care what hardships he would have 
to endure, what hunger or cold or barbarity he would 
have to suffer. Revenge would keep him alive. He dared 
not die and leave his enemy alive. 
When Frankenstein left Geneva, he knew his first task 
was to find some clue by which he could trace the steps 

144 FRANKENSTEIN 
of his fiendish creation. But his plans were not yet 
formed, and he wandered near Geneva for some hours, 
not knowing what path to follow. As night came, he 
found himself at the entrance of the cemetery where his 
mother, his father, Elizabeth, and Justine were buried. 
He entered it and approached the tomb which marked 
their graves. Everything was silent, except for the wind in 
the trees, and the night was nearly dark. The spirits of 
the dead seemed to flit around and to cast a shadow, 
which he felt but could not see. 
His deep grief gave way again to rage and despair. 
They were dead, and he lived. Their murderer also lived, 
and to destroy him, Frankenstein had to go on dragging 
out his weary existence. He kneeled on the grass and 
spoke aloud. 
“T swear, on your graves, to pursue the demon who 
caused this misery until he or I shall die in the conflict. 
For revenge only will I go on living. And I call on you, 
spirits of the dead, and on you, spirits of vengeance, to 
help me and show me the way. Let the accursed and 
hellish monster drink deep of agony. Let him feel the 
despair that now torments me!” 
As Frankenstein’s voice rose, he felt the furies possess 
him and the spirits of the dead surround him and ap- 
prove his words. He went on speaking until rage choked 
his throat. , 
He was answered through the stillness of the night by 
a loud and fiendish laugh. It rang on his ears long and 
heavily. The mountains echoed the sound, and Franken- 

FINAL REVENGE 145 
stein felt as if all hell surrounded him with mockery and 
laughter. As the hideous noise died away, a well-known 
and abhorred voice, apparently close to his ear, spoke to 
him in a whisper. 
“T am Satisfied,” said the voice. “You have decided to 
go on living, and I am satisfied.” 
Frankenstein ran toward the spot where the sound 
seemed to come from. But the devil escaped Franken- 
stein’s grasp. Suddenly the moon arose and shone full 
upon the ghastly and distorted shape as it fled with more 
than human speed. Only for a moment, the monster 
paused and made a motion with his arm as if to beckon 
his creator onward. Then he fled once more across the 
fields. 
Frankenstein pursued him. He followed any clue he 
could find. Often the clues were false and he lost many 
days in searching vainly along the windings of the Rhone 
River. One day, the blue Mediterranean Sea appeared 
before him, and, by a strange chance, he saw the fiend 
hide himself in a ship bound for the Black Sea. Franken- 
stein got on the same ship. But the monster escaped, 
Frankenstein did not know how. 
Through the Ukraine and north into the wilds of 
Russia, Frankenstein followed in the monster’s tracks. ° 
Sometimes, villagers who had been scared by this horrid 
apparition informed Frankenstein of the monster’s path. 
Sometimes, the monster himself, wanting Frankenstein to 
follow him, left some clue to guide his creator. 
Soon it was winter. When the snows came, Franken- 

146 FRANKENSTEIN 
stein was able to see the monster’s huge footprints on 
the white plain. The young doctor suffered terribly from 
cold and hunger. Once in a while, the country people 
fed him, but. mostly he lived by hunting wild animals 
that crossed his path and drinking the rain that fell from 
the sky. 
Frankenstein followed, when he could, the courses of 
the rivers. But the demon generally avoided rivers, be- 
cause too many people lived along their banks. He there- 
fore forced his pursuer deep into the wilds, the desert 
places, and the forests. Often, Frankenstein came close to 
exhaustion, starvation and death, but these were nothing 
compared to the torture of knowing that the monster was 
still alive. 
Only in sleep did Frankenstein find peace. When he 
slept, he dreamed that Henry and Elizabeth had never 
been killed, and that Justine and his father were still 
alive. When he dreamed, he heard their voices happy as 
they had been long ago. When he woke, his desire for re- 
venge became fiercer still. 
What the monster’s feelings were, Frankenstein did 
not know. Sometimes, the monster left messages written 
on the bark of trees or cut in stone, to guide his pursuer 
and make him even more furious. 
“My reign is not yet over,” said one message. “You 
live, and my power is complete. Follow me. I seek the 
everlasting ices of the north, where you will feel the mis- 
ery of cold and frost which do not bother me. You will 
find near here a dead rabbit. Eat it and grow strong. 

FINAL REVENGE 147 
Come on, my enemy. We have yet to fight for our lives. 
But you will still have to go through many miserable 
hours until that moment arrives.” 
Jeering devil! Again, Frankenstein vowed vengeance 
and promised the miserable fiend a tortured death. 
As Frankenstein went northward, the snows thickened 
and the cold grew almost too terrible to bear. The rivers 
were covered with ice and food was nearly impossible to 
find. 
The triumph of Frankenstein’s enemy increased with 
these hardships. He left another message for his follower. 
“Prepare! Your toils only begin. Wrap yourself in furs 
and buy food. For we shail soon enter upon a journey 
where your sufferings will satisfy my everlasting hatred.” 
These words only served to increase Frankenstein’s 
courage and fury. He resolved not to fail and continued 
to cross immense frozen deserts until, not far from the 
port of Archangel, he saw at a distance the frozen White 
Sea. 
Frankenstein had been traveling, for the past few 
weeks, by dog sled, which had allowed him to go so 
much faster that he had begun to gain on the monster. 
Now the fiend was only one day’s journey ahead of him, 
and he hoped to catch up before the monster should 
reach the shore. With new courage, therefore, Franken- 
stein pressed on, and in two days arrived at a wretched 
village at the sea’s edge. He asked the villagers about the 
fiend and received accurate information. 
A gigantic monster, they said, had arrived the night 

148 FRANKENSTEIN 
before, armed with a gun and many pistols, and had 
frightened away the people who lived in one of the cot- 
tages. He had carried off their winter store of food and 
placed the food on a sled. He had then seized many of 
the village’s trained dogs, harnessed them, and driven off 
across the frozen sea. The villagers thought the monster 
would soon be destroyed by the breaking of the ice or 
frozen by the eternal frosts. 
On hearing this, Frankenstein nearly despaired. The 
monster had escaped him. He must now begin a destruc- 
tive and almost endless journey across the mountainous 
ices of the ocean—in cold that few humans could stand 
for long. Yet the thought that the fiend should live and 
be triumphant made Frankenstein’s rage return and he 
prepared to follow the monster once more. 
He exchanged his land sled for one made to travel the 
frozen oceans, and he bought dogs to pull the sled and 
food to carry with him. Then he departed from the land 
to cross the White Sea and the Barents Sea, to reach at 
last the Arctic Ocean. He could scarcely tell how many 
days passed as he crossed the immense whiteness. Huge 
and rugged mountains of ice often barred his passage, 
and he heard the thunder of the ground sea which 
threatened his destruction, should the ice break up. But 
again the ice refroze and made the paths of the sea safe. 
He could tell from the amount of food left that about 
three weeks had passed. Struggling over the top of a 
sloping ice-mountain, Frankenstein suddenly saw a dark 
speck on the white plain ahead. He strained his sight to 

FINAL REVENGE 149 
discover what it could be and uttered a wild cry when he 
saw the outline of a sled and the deformed proportions 
of a well-known form. There was no time to delay! He 
fed the dogs to give them strength and raced after the 
speck in the distance. The sled was still visible. Franken- 
stein did not lose sight of it except now and then when 
some ice rock hid it momentarily from view. So quickly 
did he gain on the monster’s sled that after two days he 
saw his enemy at no more than a mile’s distance. 
But then, when the monster seemed almost within 
Frankenstein’s grasp, he suddenly lost all trace of him. A 
ground sea was heard. The thunder of its progress, as the 
waters rolled and swelled beneath him, became every 
moment more terrible. He pressed on, but it was no use. 
The wind rose. The sea roared. With the mighty shock of 
an earthquake, the ice split and cracked with a tremen- 
dous sound. In a few minutes, a wild sea rolled between 
Frankenstein and his enemy, and Frankenstein was left 
drifting on a piece of ice which was growing smaller all 
the time. Soon he must be prepared for a hideous death. 
A few hours passed. Several of the dogs died. Fran- 
kenstein himself was on the brink of total collapse, when, 
not far off, he saw an unbelievable sight. It was a ship. 
He had never known of a vessel to come so far north and 
the sight astounded him. Quickly he destroyed part of his 
sled to make oars, and began to move his ice-raft in the 
direction of the ship. 
The ship’s captain had his men pull Frankenstein on 
board. He was more dead than alive, but after a week 

150 FRANKENSTEIN 
under the captain’s care, he had recovered enough to 
talk. 
“Are you going north?” Frankenstein asked. 
“Yes,” replied the captain. “I am making a scientific 
voyage to the North Pole.” The captain stared at Fran- 
kenstein, noting the wild expression in his guest’s eyes, 
the suffering so evident on his face and in his thin and 
feverish body. He felt sorry for Frankenstein and wished 
to know if he could be of any help. “Why did you come 
so far on the ice?” the captain asked. 
i am searching for someone who has run away from 
” Frankenstein answered. 
BIE the man you pursue travel on a dog sled?” asked 
the captain. 
ay ese 
“Then I think we have seen him,” the captain said. 
“The day we picked you up, we saw some dogs pulling a 
sled with a huge man in it across the ice.” 
At this, Frankenstein grew excited and questioned the 
captain more closely. 
“Do you think the breaking up of the ice might have 
destroyed the sled?” Frankenstein asked. 
“It is possible,” the captain replied. “But the ice did 
not finish breaking up until midnight, and the traveler 
might have reached a place of safety by then.” 
“T must remain on deck to watch,” said Frankenstein 
wildly. : 
“Please,” begged the captain kindly, “please rest. You 
are still so weak. I will have one of my men watch for 

FINAL REVENGE 151 
you. Allow me to introduce myself. My name is Captain 
Walton.” 
“IT am Dr. Frankenstein and I thank you for your kind- 
ness,” Frankenstein replied. “Why are you making this 
difficult voyage, sir?” he asked, as the captain led him 
back to his cabin. 
“Since my boyhood,” answered Captain Walton, “I 
have wanted more than anything else in the world to dis- 
cover new knowledge about the earth, particularly in 
these northern reaches.” 
A groan burst from Frankenstein. “Unhappy man!” he 
cried. “Do you share my madness for discovery, then? 
Let me tell you my own tale, and you will give up the 
search for knowledge and wisdom, and understand the 
danger of meddling in things better left alone.” 
“J can see by the grief in your eyes that you have suf- 
fered terrible misfortunes,” said Captain Walton. “I 
sympathize and would like to help you if I can.” 
“Thank you for your sympathy,” responded Franken- 
stein, “but it is useless. My fate is nearly fulfilled. I wait 
for only one thing, and then I shall be in peace. If you 
like, I will tell you my history and then you will 
understand.” 
Captain Walton listened, horrified and appalled, to 
Frankenstein’s story. When he had finished, Captain 
Walton offered Frankenstein his hand and once again his 
help. 
“The only help for me,” said Frankenstein, “is the 
death of the monster. He must not live to add to the list 

152 FRANKENSTEIN 
of his dark crimes. If I should die and you should ever 
see him, kill him if you can. Do not listen to him, for he 
is very persuasive. Once his words had power even over 
my heart. But do not trust him. His soul is as hellish as 
his form, full of treachery and fiendish malice.” 
“T believe your story and will do all within my power,” 
answered Captain Walton. 
“And do you now understand the danger of high ambi- 
tions in the realms of undiscovered knowledge?” added 
Frankenstein. “My thoughts and imagination went as 
high as the heavens, and now I am chained in an eternal 
hell. Once I exulted in my powers to be useful to human- 
ity, but I failed, and my life has been ruined by my mad 
scheme.” 
It was now September. Frankenstein had been on 
board the ship for a month, each day growing weaker 
and more feverish. The ice, which had never broken up 
enough for the ship to move on, began to thicken and 
close about the ship until it was in danger of being 
crushed. The cold was terrible and the crew was 
frightened. 
In the middle of the month, the ice began to move 
again, and roarings like thunder were heard at a distance 
as the islands split and cracked. Soon the ice near the 
ship cracked, and huge ice floes were driven north, 
leaving a clear passage to the south. The-sailors begged 
Captain Walton not to go farther north, but to return to 
England. Captain Walton was forced to consent. 
“You go,” said Frankenstein, when he heard this, “but 
. 

FINAL REVENGE 153 
I cannot. In a fit of enthusiastic madness, I created a 
rational creature to whom I owed happiness and well- 
being. But I could not give him that happiness without 
endangering my own species to whom I owe an even 
greater duty. In return for my refusing to create a wife 
for him, the monster destroyed my family and friends. 
Miserable himself, he devotes himself to making others 
miserable. He must be destroyed, and I must destroy 
him.” 
“But you cannot remain behind, and I must sail in the 
morning,” said the captain. 
“T must remain here, and I will,” said Frankenstein 
firmly. He went out on deck to spend his last night on 
board watching. 
“We will take turns,” said the captain, noting how pale 
and ill Frankenstein looked. “You go below and rest for 
a few hours, and later on I will wake you.” 
Frankenstein nodded and returned to the cabin. The 
captain kept watch for an hour, and then he heard a 
strange and unusual sound. It was coming from below, 
from the cabin where Frankenstein slept. The captain 
dashed below decks and flung open the cabin door. His 
jaw hung open in horror. 
He saw immediately that Frankenstein was dead— 
whether from the feverish illness he suffered, or from 
shock, the captain never knew. Over the dead Franken- 
stein hung a gigantic figure, deformed and hideous. As 
he bent over Frankenstein, long locks of ragged hair hid 
his face from the captain’s view, but one vast hand was 

154 FRANKENSTEIN 
stretched out. To the captain, the hand appeared like 
that of a mummy. At the sound of the captain’s entrance, 
the monster turned quickly around. Never had the cap- 
tain seen anything so horrible as that face, hideous to 
begin with and now distorted even more by a strange 
combination of rage and sorrow. 
“That is also my victim,’ the monster whispered 
hoarsely, pointing at Frankenstein. “Now that he is dead, 
my crimes are complete. Ah, Frankenstein. What use is it 
now that I ask your pardon—I who, in destroying all you 
loved, destroyed you! Alas, he is cold—he cannot answer 
me.” 
The captain thought of his promise to Frankenstein, to 
kill the monster if he appeared. But curiosity, and a cer- 
tain sympathy for the monster’s sorrow, made him wish 
to speak to the monster first. He approached the tremen- 
dous being. He dared not raise his eyes again to the 
monster’s face, there was something so frightening and 
unearthly in its ugliness. 
“If you wanted forgiveness,” said the captain, “you 
should have thought of it long ago and not pushed your 
diabolical vengeance this far!” 
“And do you think,” said the demon, “that I did not 
feel agony-and remorse for what I did?” The monster 
pointed to Frankenstein. “He did not suffer a thousandth 
of the agony that I suffered performing those hellish 
deeds. A frightful selfishness hurried me onward, while 
my heart was poisoned with remorse. Do you think the 
groans of Clerval were music to my ears? My heart was 

FINAL REVENGE SIS) 
made for love and sympathy. And when it was made by 
misery to feel hatred, I suffered tortures you cannot 
imagine. 
“After the murder of Clerval, I returned to Switzerland 
heart-broken. I pitied Frankenstein. My pity amounted 
to horror. I abhorred myself. But when I discovered that 
he, the creator of my life and my torments, dared to 
hope for happiness, that he, having destroyed my wife, 
was about to find joy in his own, then envy and bitter- 
ness filled me with rage. I wanted revenge, and I remem- 
bered my own threat to be with him on his wedding 
night. I could not help myself. Yet afterward, I was no 
longer miserable. I had cast off all feeling, all anguish. 
Evil thenceforth became my good. Having gone so far, I 
had no choice but to adapt myself to the plan I had be- 
gun. And now it has ended. There is my last victim!” 
At first, the captain was touched by the things the 
monster said. But he remembered Frankenstein’s warn- 
ing about the monster’s powers of persuasion, and he 
grew angry again. 
“Wretch!” said Captain Walton. “How dare you come 
here to whine over the destruction you yourself have 
caused. You set fire to a house, and then you cry when it 
burns. You are indeed a fiend!” , 
“No,” whispered the monster softly. “You are wrong. 
But I do not seek pity. I shall never find sympathy. I nev- 
er did, even when I was virtuous. How I longed then for 
someone to overlook my outward form and return my 
love. I had high thoughts then of honor and loyalty. But 

156 FRANKENSTEIN 
now crime has lowered me beneath the meanest animal. 
No guilt, no misery can be found as great as mine. So 
how could I seek for sympathy? I am content to suffer 
alone as long as I live, and die with curses flung at my 
memory. I cannot believe I am the same creature whose 
thoughts were once full of beauty and kindness. But it is 
so. The fallen angel becomes a devil. 
“Yet, while I destroyed Frankenstein’s life, I did not 
satisfy my own desires. I still wanted love and fellowship, 
yet always, all my life everyone has spurned me. Why 
does man not hate Felix, who drove me out? Or the fa- 
ther who shot me when I saved his child? But no. People 
hate only me, the miserable, the abandoned, an abortion 
to be kicked, spurned, and trampled on. 
“But it is true that I am a wretch. I have drawn my 
creator to his ruin. But do not fear. I shall cause no more 
terror. I shall seek the most northern place of the globe. I 
shall collect my funeral pyre, light it, and throw myself 
upon its fire. The flames will consume me and my ashes 
will blow out to sea so that no man, seeing my remains, 
can learn from them how to construct another such as I. 
I will no longer be miserable, no longer see the sun or 
stars, or feel the winds play on my cheeks. Light, feeling, 
sense will pass away. Damned{as I am, where can I find 
peace except in death. Years ago, I should have wept to 
die. But no longer,” said the monster sadly and solemnly. 
“Farewell. Farewell to you, the last human being whose 
eyes will ever see me. And Frankenstein, my creator, 
farewell.” 

FINAL REVENGE 

158 FRANKENSTEIN 
As he said this, the monster leaped from the cabin 
window on to the ice-raft which lay close to the ship. The 
captain could do nothing but stare after the monster, who 
was soon borne away by the waves and lost in darkness 
and distance. 
; The fond 
22 155615 


+e 


2 iebezeeenae es 
sinter pe ersa egy ee ae 
3, 
Wate rat 
$3 rere Sek Maren she feeds, 
as ee ies 
om 
