pesite
iter:
ere ie
St eaten:
bevaes< (Scie Sores aeteny ae a
s
ere
Ore Lees ea iL
De ei ue
rf
i eh et See er
ae pyeaseenaseste : Saray =apracertessec
PRESS ORIOY ST Brae ae Ss peste in ie ite ot PSESeAbRS Se Tp sece hss estoy epias we set ER DI TE egy =i Es REGRSES VSS CEOS 3a TE ASST RE Saar
Sy IFES
Ei:
2 Sass ohh
Tica
\ - a
f
g ie |
CK
FP (Se = tof 7 fe hie
f
sr) = ry ee]
4 ; y
' we
ee ns FRANKENSTEIN
\p oS (G .
MARY,SHELLEY /797-/85/
Frankenstein
Adapted by Dale Carlson
Illustrated by Neil Boyle
GOLDEN PRESS (#) NEW YORK
f
x '
a
ATALOG CARD NUMBER 68-9479 d ; auth N po ieee le) =
BY WESTERN PUBLISHING COMPANY, INC.
"S| CONTENTS |&
WUMELC REATION. eet.) oe 9
AE EGE SC AP i Gem er eae scat, owt 24
IEIEC ION were Menten Se teee Ste nko. nes 36
REVENGE eter Ie Pe Renee ee a
PONGECTOM ACE nt 60: he nee 89
8 FRANKENSTEIN
"31 |c-
The Creation
It was a dark, stormy night late in November. In his
laboratory, a tower room high over the roofs of Ingol-
stadt, Germany, Dr. Victor Frankenstein bent over the
huge, lifeless figure before him. It was nearly finished,
this creature which had occupied his mind and soul for
nearly two years. In an agony of excitement, Franken-
stein examined his work. Finished! All that remained
- was to infuse the spark of life into its lifeless form, to ap-
ply his electrical instruments and make his creature live.
Frankenstein performed his final task and waited, his ©
gaze fixed on the gigantic figure. It was already one in
the morning; the rain battered against the window of his
laboratory. His candle was nearly burned out, when, by
the glimmer of its pale light, he saw the dull yellow eye
of the creature open; it breathed hard, and a violent
shudder shook its limbs->
Frankenstein stared; horrified, at this catastrophe, this
hideous thing he had worked on so hard and taken such
10 FRANKENSTEIN
pains to form. The creature's body, though huge, was in
perfect proportion, and Frankenstein had chosen his fea-
tures as beautiful. Beautiful! Ugh-his yellow skin barely
covered the muscles and arteries beneath. His hair was
thick and shiny black, his teeth of a pearly whiteness,
but the handsome hair and teeth only made a horrid
contrast with his watery eyes, which seemed almost the
same color as the yellowish sockets in which they were
set, his shriveled skin, and straight black lips.
"Oh God!" thought Frankenstein. "How changeable
are the feelings of human nature. Pve worked hard for
nearly two years, for the sole purpose of infusing life into
an inanimate body. My dream_was to prove that I had
discovered the secret of life, to create a new race of
beings. For this Pve gone without rest, without family
and friends. Now I've finished, and I can't bear the sight
of him!"
The beauty of Frankenstein's dream had vanished. Af-
ter one last look, filled with breathless horror and dis-
gust, he rushed out of the laboratory to his bedroom and
threw himself, still clothed, onto the bed. He hoped for
seep,, for a few moments of forgetfulness. Sleep did
come, but with it came wild, frightening dreams.
He saw himself first as a boy, with his family, in their
lovely Swiss home in Geneva where Frankenstein was
born. He saw his father, a man of honor and great im-
portance, respected by all who knew him; his mother,
now dead, but in life, gentle and beautiful; his two
younger brothers, Ernest and William; and Elizabeth, the
THE CREATION 4)
lovely Elizabeth, adopted into the Frankenstein family as
a child and adored by them all.
Even as a boy, Victor Frankenstein had. a, (Passionate
thirst_ for knowledge. While Elizabeth took pleasure in
beauty, in the majestic and wondrous scenes which sur-
rounded their Swiss home-Victor was not satisfied with
the appearances of things. He had to find out their
causes. The world to him was a secret he had to discover,
and his earliest memory was his own curiosity, his need
to iearn the hidden laws of nature.
The family's favorite home was not their house in the
town, but their country house at Belrive on the eastern
shore of Lake Geneva. Here Victor read and studied,
choosing for company only his family and his closest
school friend, Henry Clerval. Victor desired only to
learn, though not about all things. Politics, government
and languages bored him. It was the secrets of heaven
and earth he was after, and whether he studied the out-
- ward substance of things, or the inner spirit of nature
and the mysterious soul of man, his curiosity was always
about the physical secrets of the world. His childhood
was a happy one, with his books, his loving Elizabeth,
and the close bonds of friendship he formed with Henry
Clerval.
Frankenstein, in the darkness of his bedroom,
dreamed on. His mind held the picture of his family as
they were, with himself happy among them, for a few
more seconds, before he saw himself on that fatal day.
They were all at their summer home at Belrive, when
12 FRANKENSTEIN
they witnessed a violent and terrible thunderstorm. Fran-
kenstein was fifteen years old and had, until then,
learned much of his natural philosophy from sixteenth
century writers such as Agrippa, who wrote of magic;
Paracelsus, the (alchemist 'and chemist, and Albertus
Magnus, the thirteenth century scholastic philosopher.
How was young Frankenstein to know that their ancient
principles had been entirely exploded, that there was
now a more modern system of science? His father was
not scientific, and Frankenstein was left to struggle to
teach himself these difficult subjects, which were not
taught in the schools of Geneva. He searched these
books for a way to find the Elixir) of life, tried to raise
ghosts and devils through their incantations, and floun-
dered through their ancient theories until the accident of
the thunderstorm changed everything.
The violent electrical storm burst from the heavens
over the mountains of Jura. Frankenstein stood at the
door of the house and watched the storm with delight.
Suddenly a stream of fire rose from an old and beautiful
oak tree which stood about twenty yards from the house.
When the dazzling light vanished the oak disappeared,
and nothing remained but a blasted stump. The bolt of
lightning had destroyed the tree-and the power of elec-
tricity had gripped Frankenstein's imagination. No more
was he interested in alchemy. The theory of electricity
and/galvanism occupied him-and all the realm of mod-
ern science. In his dream, Frankenstein relived the mo-
ments of that terrible storm, the bursting thunder and the
THE CREATION 13
dazzling light that was to determine his destiny, to set
him on a course from which there was no return.
Next, he saw himself at seventeen. His parents had
decided that he should become a student at the Uni-
versity of Ingolstadt in Germany. His mother died of
scarlet fever before he left, but shortly after, Franken-
stein departed on the coach for the old university town.
How young he was then, how eager to learn everything
there was to know. His professors laughed when Fran-
kenstein mentioned the ancient books of alchemy he had
read.
"How useless," Professor Krempe had cried. "You
must begin your studies all over again."
Frankenstein nodded; he knew the uselessness of those
books as well as the professor.
Frankenstein studied hard in all the branches of mod-
ern science, especially chemistry and physiology. And as
he studied, his mind was filled with one thought, one
- conception, one purpose.
"So much has been done," he exclaimed. "More, far
more, will I achieve. Following in footsteps already
marked, I will pioneer a new way, explore unknown
powers, and unfold to the world the deepest mysteries of
creation."
His professors were delighted with Frankenstein's in-
telligence and interest in his work.
"Continue to work hard," Professor Waldman said,
"and I have no doubt of your success."
Frankenstein took the professor's advice. For two years
14 FRANKENSTEIN
he studied hard, making rapid and brilliant progress, un-
til in the end he knew as much of the theory and practice
of natural philosophy as the professors of Ingolstadt. He
was about to return home to Geneva, when an incident
happened that made him stay.
What had interested Frankenstein most was the struc-
ture of the human body and, indeed, anything that was
endowed with life. It was the principle of life, the cause
of generation he wished to discover, and to learn it, he
studied death. It was a difficult and unpleasant study.
Without his extraordinary enthusiasm, it would have
been nearly impossible. But in Frankenstein's education,
his father had taken care that his mind should not be im-
pressed with supernatural horrors. He had never been
afraid of such things as ghosts and spirits. Darkness had
no effect upon his imagination, nor graveyards or tombs.
He spent days and nights in graveyard vaults, in char-
nel houses where the dead are kept. He saw how the fine
form of man was degraded and wasted, and how the cor-
ruption of death succeeded to the bloom of life. He saw
how the worm inherited the wonders of the eye and
brain.
After weeks examining and analyzing the causes of
death, the changes from life to death, a light broke in
upon the darkness, a light brilliant and wondrous, yet so
simple! He had discovered what no man before him had
understood-the secret of life itself. He could scarcely
believe that he alone had been chosen to discover so
astonishing a secret.
THE CREATION ES
After days and nights of incredible labor and fatigue,
he had succeeded in understanding the principle of life.
He became capable of bestowing it himself. The dis-
covery was overwhelming. What had been beyond the
understanding of the wisest men since the creation of the
world was now within Frankenstein's grasp.
Frankenstein stirred in his sleep at the next vision
sleep brought. It was himself, alone in the darkest night
in the graveyards near Ingolstadt. It was his work, now
that he had the power of giving life, to prepare a body to
receive it.
The dissecting room, the slaughterhouse, the grave, fur-
nished his materials. Disturbing the tremendous secrets
of the human frame, he worked in his solitary tower
chamber, separated from the rest of the house by a long
hall and a staircase. In the horrors of his secret toil, he
felt he was losing his soul and he drove himself madly
toward the completion of his work. Often, his human na-
ture turned with disgust from his workshop of filthy cre-
ation, but his purpose, to scale the heights of scientific
achievement, spurred him on.
The work was difficult. To prepare a body with all its
intricacies of fibers, muscles and veins, to implant the
organs and connect the arteries, was a labor which nearly
defeated Frankenstein again and again. He wondered if
he should have started with a simpler being, but his
imagination was too exalted. His wish was to give life to
a man.
He found, when he had begun the creation of a hu-
16 FRANKENSTEIN
THE CREATION NF
man being, that the smallness of the parts stopped him
from working as quickly» as he wished. Contrary to his
first intention, therefore, he made the being of a gigantic
Stature, about eight feet in height and proportionately
broad.
Months passed, and in those months, Frankenstein's
ambition bore him onward like a hurricane. To break
through the boundaries of life and death! To create a
new species of beings who would bless him as their cre-
ator. He might even, in time, though now he could not,
learn enough to bring the dead back to life.
These thoughts supported him during the horror of his
labors. He was pale, emaciated from lack of food, often
feverish, as he pursued nature to her hiding places.
The graveyard! The vision of that dark, silent place,
where only the moon witnessed his unhallowed labor,
would not leave Frankenstein's sleeping mind. He saw
himself bending over an open grave, the coffin lid gaping
-wide to expose the body in its shroud, the graveworms
crawling among the folds. He bent closer, in the cold,
shadowed night, and thought he saw his mother.
Frankenstein woke from his sleep with horror; a cold
perspiration covered his forehead, his teeth chattered,
and every limb trembled: when, by the dim and yellow
light of the moon, as it forced its way through the win-
dow, he saw the monster. It moved heavily across the
room, coming toward him-the miserable thing he had
created.
Frankenstein waited in horror. The monster parted the
18 FRANKENSTEIN
curtains of the bed. His eyes, if eyes they could be called,
were fixed on Frankenstein. The monster's jaws opened,
and he muttered some strange, hoarse sounds, while a
grin wrinkled his cheeks. The monster might have spo-
ken, but Frankenstein did not wait to hear. The monster
stretched out his hand, seemingly to stop his creator, but
Frankenstein escaped, leaped from the bed, and rushed
downstairs. He hid in the courtyard of the house, listen-
ing, fearing that each sound would announce the ap-
proach of the demoniacal corpse to which he had so
miserably given life.
No mortal could stand the horror of that face. A
mummy brought back to life could not be so hideous as
that wretch. Frankenstein had gazed upon him while he
was unfinished and he was ugly then. But when those
muscles and joints, when that face became capable of
motion, the thing became a creature more nightmarish
than any mind could imagine. And its hugeness, the very
hugeness Frankenstein had planned, only TI EY its
_ monstrosity.
In the cold, dark courtyard, Dr. Frankenstein felt his
pulse beat so quickly and violently that he was aware of
every artery. Though the storm was over, the stones of
the courtyard were chilled and damp. Dr. Frankenstein -
sank down upon them and leaned against the dank,
rough wall. He was exhausted from months of labor
and the horror of this night. Mingled with the horror,
he felt the bitterness of his disappointment. The exalted
dreams, the joyous hopes of success in the creation of a
THE CREATION 19
noble and rational being, the marvelous sense of his own
powers, the worth of his work to science, to humanity, all
the heaven of his glorious ambitions-now had become a
hell to him. The change was so rapid, the overthrow so
complete!
Sick with fear, Frankenstein remained in the court-
yard throughout the night. Morning came at last, dis-
mal and wet with the rain which poured again from a
dark and comfortless sky. His sleepless and aching eyes
sought the church of Ingolstadt with its white steeple and-
clock. At six, the porter opened the gates of the court
and Frankenstein went out into the streets, pacing them
with quick steps, as if by moving quickly he could avoid
the monster whom he feared to see at every turning of
the street. He dared not return to the apartment where
he lived but felt as though he had to hurry on, though he
was drenched by the rain and exhausted in every limb.
He continued walking for a long time, trying to ease
the burden of his mind with bodily exercise. Through the
narrow cobblestone streets of Ingolstadt he went, past
houses whose ancient walls were built so close they
seemed to huddle together for support and warmth. He
_ passed the old dtica) palace and the Gothic church to the
ruined and crumbling walls of the city. Then, tracing his
way back, he was again among the twisting streets. But
though Frankenstein moved on, he walked without any
clear idea of where he was or what he was doing. Fright-
ned, he hurried his footsteps, not daring to look about
him-
20 FRANKENSTEIN
"Like one who, on a lonely road,
Doth walk in fear and dread,
And having once turned round, walks on,
And turns no more his head;
Because he knows a frightful fiend
Doth close behind him tread."
The Ancient Mariner-Coleridge
At last Dr. Frankenstein came to the inn where stage-.
coaches and carriages usually stopped. The horses
stamped the cobblestones restlessly and people were mill-
ing about. Frankenstein paused, his eyes fixed on a coach
that was coming toward him from the other end of the
street. As it drew nearer, he saw that it was the Swiss
stagecoach. It stopped just where he was standing, and
when the door was opened, he saw within Henry Clerval,
his oldest and closest friend, who instantly sprung out.
"My dear Frankenstein," exclaimed Clerval, "how
glad I am to see you. And how wonderful that you
should be here just at the moment I arrive."
Frankenstein all but flung himself upon his friend. He
had never been so delighted to see anyone. Being with
Clerval again brought back memories of his father, Eliz-
abeth, the scenes of his home. He grasped Clerval's hand
and for a moment forgot his horror and misfortune. For
the first time in many months he felt happy. The two
friends walked through .the town of Ingolstadt toward
Frankenstein's college, talking of their friends, their fam-
ilies, and of Clerval's good news.
THE CREATION 2]
"I have finally persuaded my father to let me study
~ here at the University of Ingolstadt with you," said Cler-
val. "Not natural science, of course. I shall master the lit-
erature and the languages of the Orient."
"Nothing could please me more than to have your
company," answered Frankenstein, "but tell me again
about my father, brothers, and Elizabeth. Are they really
well?" It had been more than four years since he had
seen them.
"Very well, and very happy, but a little worried be-
cause they do not hear from you very often. But my dear
Victor," continued Clerval, stopping short and gazing full
in Frankenstein's face, "I have just noticed how ill you
look, so thin and pale. You seem as if you have not slept
for several nights."
"You're right," answered Frankenstein wearily. "I
have been working so hard lately on one particular ex-
periment that I have not allowed myself much rest, as
you see. But I hope, I really hope, that the work is now
at an end and that I am finally free."
Frankenstein trembled. He couldn't bear to think
about, much less discuss, what had happened the night
_ before. He walked more quickly, and they soon arrived
at his college. He looked up at the tower where his apart-
ment was. What if the creature whom he had left in his
rooms might still be there, alive, and walking about? He
dreaded to see the monster. But he feared still more that
Henry should see him.
Frankenstein begged his friend, therefore, to wait a
2D FRANKENSTEIN
few minutes at the bottom of the stairs, while he himself
went up to his apartment. He climbed to the topmost
landing, passed along the hall, and began slowly to as-
cend the dark, narrow staircase to the tower. He stood
with his hand on the lock of the door and steadied him-
self. He paused; a cold shuddering came over him. Then
he threw the door open forcibly, like a child who expects
to find a ghost waiting for him on the other side. But
nothing appeared. He stepped fearfully in. The room
which served as both workshop and sitting room was
empty, and even his bedroom was freed from its hideous
guest. He searched again carefully among the hangings
of the great oaken bed, in the cavernous shadows of the
open heavy wardrobe, and then in his workroom beneath
the tables and behind the doors. Books were strewn
about, the fragments of a glass bottle lay scattered on the
floor, and several garments huddled in a crumpled pile
near the wall as if they had been violently thrown. But if
evidence abounded of the room's former occupant, the
occupant himself was gone. Frankenstein could hardly
believe such good fortune. When he finally convinced
himself that his enemy had really fled, he laughed for joy
and ran down to Clerval.
They climbed to Frankenstein's rooms together, and a
servant soon brought breakfast. But Frankenstein was
unable to contain himself. It was not only joy that pos-
sessed him. His flesh tingled as if it were being pricked
by thousands of tiny pins, and his pulse beat rapidly. He
could not remain in the same place for a single instant.
THE CREATION 23
He jumped over the chairs, clapped his hands, and
laughed hysterically.
At first, Clerval thought Frankenstein's liveliness was
due to the delight of his own arrival. But as he watched
Frankenstein more carefully, Clerval saw a wildness in
Frankenstein's eyes he did not understand. He listened to
the shrieks of heartless laughter with growing fear and
astonishment.
"My dear Victor! What for God's sake is the matter?"
cried Clerval. "Don't laugh like that! How ill you are!
What is the cause of all this?"
"Do not ask me," said Frankenstein, putting his hands
over his eyes to shut out the terrible sight. For what he
thought he saw, gliding into the room, was the hideous
monster, his hands outstretched. "Ask him!" cried Fran-
kenstein, pointing a trembling finger. "He can tell. Oh,
save me! Save me!" Imagining that the monster had
seized him, Frankenstein struggled furiously, and fell to
the floor.
"oj Dp |e
The Escape
It was difficult for the monster, later on, to remember
his own beginning. Like a child's memory of his first few
years, the monster's memory of his early weeks was con-
fused. His sensations were so mixed together, that he
saw, felt, heard and smelled things all at the same time.
He could not tell his senses apart, and he understood
nothing of the feelings that seized him as he awoke into
the world.
He remembered first the flickering light of the candle.
But the small, bright flame was too strong for his eyes. It
pressed upon his nerves and forced the monster to close
his lids. Darkness then came over him and frightened
him. Yet hardly had he felt this, when he opened his
eyes and the light poured in upon him ae The second
time, it was easier to bear.
He found that he could move, sit up and then stand.
With his hands outstretched before him, he stumbled for-
ward and felt his way among the dark, shadowy shapes
THE ESCAPE 25
of things in the gloomy room where he had awakened.
Objects fell, startling him with noises. It confused him to
be surrounded by things he could touch but, in the dark-
ness, could not see. A dank wind came in through the
shutters and gave the monster his first sensation of cold.
He stumbled, by chance, upon the open wardrobe and
managed to cover himself with some clothes.
It was the gust of air that drew him to the window. He
climbed out, and along the balcony, until he came to
another window through which he entered. More dark
shapes-but from one of them came a sound, a low
moan, which the monster sought until he found its ori-
gin. Lifting the bedcurtain, he gazed down. Someone on
the bed gave a cry. The monster's vocal cords re-
sponded with their first sound, and his hand groped
instinctively toward the first living creature he had ever
seen. The man cried out again and escaped into the
darkness. The monster was alone once more.
HeTurched from the room, half walked, half fell down
the stairs, and found his way into the streets. In the
black, rainy night, he wandered along deserted alleys,
groping with his hands along the walls as if to find his
way out of a maze. When the sky paled into the light of
morning, the monster experienced a change in his sensa-
tions. In the dark, troublesome objects had surrounded
him. Now he found that he could wander easily, with no
obstacles which he could not either climb over or avoid.
He left the city and wandered into the open country.
If the light had at first pleased him, by noon the heat
26 FRANKENSTEIN
of the sun wearied him and the day's brightness after
the rain hurt his eyes. His wanderings took him to the
forest near Ingolstadt, and he found a place under the
trees by the side of a brook. Here he lay and rested until
he felt the first torments of hunger and thirst. This
roused him from his exhaustion and he ate some dried
berries which he found hanging on the trees or lying on
the ground. He satisfied his thirst at the brook and then,
lying down, was overcome by sleep.
It was dark when he awoke. He felt cold and fright-
ened in his loneliness. His few clothes were not enough
to keep out the dew of night and he shivered, dimly
aware of his own helplessness, his poor wretched misery.
Feeling pain invade him from all sides, he sat down and
wept.
Soon a gentle light stole over the heavens and gave
him a sensation of pleasure. He started up and saw a
radiant form rise from among the trees. He did not know
it then, but it was the moon, and he gazed at it with a
kind of wonder. It moved slowly, but enlightened his
path, and he went again in search of berries. He was still
cold, when under one of the trees he found a huge cloak,
with which he covered himself, and sat down upon the
ground. No clear ideas occupied his mind. All was con-
fused. He felt light and hunger and thirst and darkness.
Many sounds rung in his ears, and on all sides smells
greeted his nostrils. The only object that he could distin-
guish was the bright moon, and he fixed his eyes on that
with pleasure.
a
THE ESCAPE 27
Days and nights passed before the monster learned to
tell his senses apart. Little by little, he saw plainly the
clear water that gave him drink and the trees that shaded
him with their leaves. He was delighted when he first dis-
covered that the pleasant sounds in his ears came from
the small, winged animals which flew about the forest.
Sometimes he tried to imitate the pleasant songs of the
birds, but he could not. Sometimes he tried to express his
feelings in his own way, but the terrible sounds which
broke from his throat frightened him into silence again.
The moon disappeared from the night and then came
again, while the monster remained in the forest. All his
sensations were clear by then and every day his mind re-
ceived new ideas. His eyes became accustomed to the
light and saw everything in its right form. Now he could
tell the insect from the flower and the flowers from each
other. He could tell the difference in each bird and the
song it sang.
One day, when the winter cold had grown bitter, the
monster found a fire which had been left by some wan-
dering beggars. He was delighted by its warmth. In his
joy, he put his hand into the burning embers, and quick-
ly pulled it out again with a cry of pain. How strange pts
seemed to him that a thing could bring both pleasure
and pain!
He looked carefully at the materials of the fire and was
happy to find that it was made of branches. He quickly
collected some, but they were wet and would not burn.
He sat, rocking himself sadly, and watched the fire. As
28 FRANKENSTEIN
he watched, he saw the wood which he had placed near
the embers catch fire. He realized that the heat had dried
the branches and, overjoyed by his discovery, busied
himself collecting more wood to dry in order to have a
large supply of fire. When night came on and the mon-
ster grew sleepy, he was worried that his fire might go
out. He covered it carefully with dry wood and leaves
and placed wet branches upon it. Then he spread his
cloak, lay on the ground, and sank into sleep.
When he awoke in the morning, his first thought was
of his fire. He uncovered it and a gentle breeze quickly
fanned the embers into flame. He saw this, and made a
fan of branches in order to wake the embers whenever
he wished. When night came again, he found, with plea-
sure, that the fire gave light as well as heat and kept the
fearful darkness away.
On another day, when he had been off hunting for
food, he came back to discover some scraps of food, left
by travelers who had used his fire. The cooked food tast-
ed good to the monster and he tried, therefore, to cook
his food in the same way by placing it on the live em-
bers. He found it spoiled the berries but that the nuts
and roots tasted much better.
Food, however, became scarce in the wintry forest.
The monster often spent a whole day searching in vain
for a few acorns to stop the pangs of hunger. He decided
to leave the forest of Ingolstadt and find a place where
his few wants could be more easily satisfied. He was un-
happy at leaving his fire, because he did not know how to
THE ESCAPE 29
start a new one. But he was too hungry to stay, and
wrapping himself in his cloak, he struck out across the
woods toward the setting sun.
It took the monster three days to find his way out of
the forest, but at last he found the open country. Snow
had fallen the night before and the fields were white.
The huge expanse of whiteness gave the monster a lonely
feeling, and the cold wet of this strange stuff chilled his
Teet:
It was early in the morning. The monster longed for
food and warmth. Stumbling across the snowy fields, at
last he saw a small hut. As he had no memory of the
houses at Ingolstadt, he examined the hut curiously. He
found the door open and went in.
An old man was inside, preparing his breakfast.
Hearing a noise, he turned.
"No, no!" he screamed, as the monster came toward
him. "Stay away from me! Whatever you are, stay away!"
The monster shook his head, for he did not understand
the words. The man screamed again, ran out of the hut
and sped across the fields.
The monster was surprised at the man's behavior, but
he was delighted with the hut. Here the snow and rain
could not reach him. The earth of the floor was dry. And
there was food-bread, cheese, milk and wine. He liked
the bread, cheese and milk, but the wine he did not like
at all. After he had eaten, the monster lay down among
some straw and fell asleep.
It was noon when he awoke. Lured by the warmth of
30 FRANKENSTEIN
the sun, which shone brightly on the white ground, the
monster determined to travel on. Remembering how
hungry he had been, he put the remains of the old man's
breakfast into a bag and left the hut.
He walked for several hours across barren country
fields. He had learned how to use his body well now, and
the monster's stride, if clumsy, was strong and agile.
At sunset, he arrived at a village. How miraculous it
appeared to him. The huts, the neat cottages and the
stately houses fascinated him by turns. The vegetables in
the gardens, the milk and cheese that he saw placed at
the windows of some of the cottages, sharpened his
appetite.
One small cottage at the edge of the village drew him
especially. Its white walls under the low, snug roof
reflected the rosiness of the setting sun, and he could see
food through the small panes of its windows.
The monster crept closer, peered through the window
at the family eating supper within and then opened the
door. He had hardly set his foot over the sill when one
of the women fell to the floor in a faint and the children
began to shriek. Soon the whole village was aroused.
The monster staggered backward, out of the garden
and into the lane. Men armed with pitchforks ran toward
him, others stopped to pick up heavy stones, which they
threw at the monster as hard as they could. The women
and children fled screaming, but the men continued to
attack the monster until he escaped, sorely bruised and
hurt, to the fields beyond the village.
THE ESCAPE 31
In pain and misery he ran on until, in the growing
darkness, he stumbled upon a low hovel. Fearfully, he
crawled inside. For a long time, the monster sat not dar-
ing to move, scarcely daring to breathe lest someone
come upon him and hurt him again. He saw that the
hovel adjoined a cottage of a neat and pleasant appear-
ance, but after his last horrible experience, he did not
dare to enter.
He gazed about his wretched place of refuge. It was
made of wood, and was so low he could not sit upright
in it. No boards, however, had been placed over the
earth which formed the floor. But it was dry and, al-
though the wind entered the hovel through a thousand
chinks in its walls, he found that he was at least sheltered
from the snow and rain.
Here, then, he stayed, happy to have found a refuge
however miserable, from the terrible weather and, still
more, from the cruelty of man.
As soon as morning dawned, the monster crept from
his shelter. He wanted to examine the adjoining cottage
to see whether he could safely remain in the little' hovel
he had found. It leaned against the back of the cottage.
On one side of the hovel was a pig sty, on the other side,
a clear pool of water. The tiny entrance through which
the monster had crept the night before was simply a
doorless hole. In order to remain there unseen, the mon-
ster set to work covering the hole and all the larger
chinks with stones and pieces of wood. He arranged the
wood and stones hiding the entrance in such a manner
32 FRANKENSTEIN
that he might move them when he wished to go in or
out. All the light he enjoyed came through the pig sty,
but it was enough for him. |
When the monster had completed the walls to his sat-
isfaction, he carpeted the floor with clean straw. He was
by then weak with hunger, too weak to search the nearby
woods or fields. On a window ledge of the cottage, he
spied a loaf of bread and a cup. While he devoured the
bread in large, hungry mouthfuls, the monster turned the
cup around and around in his hands. When he had
finished eating, he crouched beside the pool of water to
drink. He was about to scoop the water with his hands as
always, when he realized for what use the cup was in-
tended. A delighted grin wrinkled his face, and he filled
the cup over and over.
Crouched by the water, the monster suddenly raised
his head. He saw in the distance the figure of a man and
remembered well his treatment of the night before. He
clutched the cup and hurriedly clawed at the wood cov-
ering the entrance to his hovel. Once inside, he carefully
replaced the wood and twisted himself into as comfort-
able a position as his cramped dwelling would allow. The
floor was at least dry, and because the hovel was built
near the chimney of the cottage, the monster felt a little
of the chimney's warmth.
Lying there, he decided to stay in this place as long as
he could, or at least until something should happen to
change his mind. It was a paradise compared to the
bleak forest with its rain-dropping branches and dank
THE ESCAPE 33
earth where he had spent the first weeks of his life. He
finished the last few crumbs of his breakfast and was
about to go outside to get a little water when he heard a
step.
The monster peered through a crack and saw a young
girl with a pail on her head passing before his hovel. Her
face, unlike all the human faces he had seen before, was
gentle and kind. Yet she was poorly dressed, a coarse
blue skirt and a little jacket being all her clothes. Her
blond hair was braided. She looked patient, yet sad. For
a moment, the monster lost sight of her. A little later, she
returned, her pail now partly filled with milk. As she
walked along, she was met by a young man, who spoke
to her in a melancholy voice. He took the pail from her
and they disappeared into the cottage. Soon the monster
caught sight of the young man again, with some tools in
his hand, crossing the field behind the cottage. The girl
was busy too, the monster noticed, working sometimes in
the yard, sometimes in the house.
The monster wanted very much to see the inside of the
'cottage. He did not know how it could be managed until he
examined the walls of his dwelling and found that there had
once been a window on the wall where now the hovel
leaned. The window panes had been filled up with wood,
and in one of these there was a tiny crack. The monster dis-
covered that if he put his eye very close, he could see the
room within.
It was a small room, whitewashed and clean, but al-
most bare of furniture. A table, a few chairs, a dresser, a
34 FRANKENSTEIN
small bed with some extra blankets folded neatly nearby
-these were all the cottage contained. In one corner,
near a small fire, sat an old man, leaning his head on his
hands. The young girl was busy arranging the cottage,
but soon she sat down beside the old man. The monster
watched as the old man picked up an instrument, began
to play, and to produce sounds sweeter than the voice of
the thrush or the nightingale.
The music moved the poor monster to ecstasy, as did
the sight of the two beings before him. He thought he
had never seen anything so beautiful. The silver hair and
the kind face of the old cottager won his reverence, and
the gentle loveliness of the girl won his love. As the old
man played his sweet, sad music, tears came to the eyes
of the girl. This the old man did not notice, until the
girl's crying could be heard. Then he spoke to her, and
the fair creature, leaving her work, knelt at his feet. He
raised her, and smiled with such kindness and love that
the monster felt sensations of a strange and overpower-
ing nature. They were a mixture of pain and pleasure,
such as he had never before experienced either from
food or hunger, warmth or cold. He drew back suddenly,
unable to bear his emotions.
But he could not stop himself looking for long. Soon
after, the young man returned, carrying on his shoulders
a load of wood. The girl met him at the door, helped
him to put down the wood, and took some of it into the
cottage to place on the fire. Then she and the youth went
to a nook of the cottage and he showed her a large loaf
THE ESCAPE 35
of bread and a piece of cheese. She seemed pleased, and
went into the garden for some roots and plants, which
she prepared to cook.
Soon their dinner was ready and they sat down to eat.
Night quickly fell, but to the monster's extreme wonder,
he found that the cottagers had a means of making light
last-by the use of candles. He was happy to find that the
setting of the sun did not put an end to the pleasure he
experienced in watching his human neighbors.
After dinner, the old man again took up the instru-
ment and made more of those wonderful sounds which
had enchanted the monster earlier. When the music was
over, the young man began to make sounds that did not
resemble the songs of birds at all. He was reading aloud
from a book, but at that time, the monster knew nothing
of words or sentences, and the sounds had no meaning
_ for him at all.
The monster lay back on his straw. How he longed to
join these gentle people! But he dared not. He remem-
bered too well how the people of the village had treated
him. He would just stay quietly in his hovel, watching,
and try to learn all he could about humans and their
ways.
Rejection
THE MONSTER observed the cottagers throughout the win-
ter. He saw that they were not entirely happy and that
one of the reasons for this was their poverty. They had
only the vegetables from their garden, the milk of one
cow, and the small wages the young man earned working
for a neighboring farmer. The monster noticed that the'
young people often suffered the pangs of hunger to give
their dinner to the old man, who was blind and could
not therefore see his children's sacrifice.
Their kindness to each other moved the monster. He
had been accustomed, during the night, to steal a part of
their food for himself. But when he found that in doing
this he inflicted pain on the cottagers, he decided to steal
no more of their food. From then on, he lived on berries,
nuts and roots which he gathered from the nearby
woods. He also discovered that he could help them by
collecting wood for their fire. This he did by night, after
learning to use the young man's wood-cutting tools. It
REJECTION 37
pleased the monster that they looked happy and _sur-
prised to find the wood there in the morning.
The monster made two most important discoveries that
winter. The first was that these people could express their
feelings to each other by making sounds. To the monster,
it was a godlike science, and he desired very much to
learn it. If only they did not make so many sounds so
quickly! But the monster listened hard, and at last he
mastered a few of their words and understood their
meaning.
"Fire, milk, bread, wood," he repeated delightedly
again and again in his low, hoarse voice. "Felix, Agatha,
father, sister, brother."' There was another word, "dear-
est," but he did not understand what it meant.
He learned also about reading, that Felix could find
the signs for speech on paper. How the monster wished
to learn! He wanted so much to make friends with the
cottagers, but he knew he had better not try until at least
_ he had mastered their language. Being able to speak to
them might make them overlook his deformity.
Because that was the monster's second discovery that
winter-his own ugliness. For months he had admired the
perfect forms of his cottagers, their grace, beauty and
marvelous skin. Then, one evening, when he was out in
the woods, he saw himself clearly reflected in a pool of
water. He was terrified of the monster mirrored in the
pool. At first, he leaped back, frightened at the unknown
image. But when he realized that the yellow, wrinkled
skin, the black lips, the colorless eyes, the crossing scars,
38 FRANKENSTEIN
and all the sum of those huge, hideous deformities was
indeed himself-then he was filled with the bitterest mis-
ery and shame. Alas! He still did not know how fatal his
deformity would prove to be.
As the sun became warmer, and the light of day long-
er, the snow vanished, and the pleasant showers of
spring brought leaves forth on the trees. The monster
continued to observe the cottagers and formed in his
imagination a thousand pictures of presenting himself to
them. He imagined that they would at first be disgusted,
until by his gentle words and behavior, he should win
their favor and afterwards their love. He even imagined
that it might be in his power to restore happiness to their
sad faces. The spring brought him joy. His senses were
refreshed by a thousand scents of delight and a thousand
sights of beauty. He blotted the past from his memory
and gilded his future with bright rays of hope.
It was toward the end of May that an event occurred
which changed the monster from what he had been into
what he was to become.
A beautiful lady arrived at the cottage on horseback.
At the sight of her, the monster noticed, the expression
of Felix's face changed from sorrow to radiant happiness,
and the sadness of the cottagers vanished into joy. The
lady, whose name was Safie, was Felix's sweetheart, and
the thought that he had lost her forever had been the
cause of his sadness.
It was Safie's father who had brought about the cot-
REJECTION 39
tagers' ruin. The cottagers' name was De Lacey, and Mr.
De Lacey had been, only a few months before the
monster's arrival, a rich and respected man in Paris. On a
visit to Paris, Safie's father, a wealthy Turk, had been un-
fairly arrested and condemned to death. Felix and his fa-
ther risked their lives to save him, and Felix fell in love
with Safie. But the ungrateful man had run off, taking Sa-
fie, whom he had promised to Felix. When the French
government found out that the De Laceys had helped
the Turk to escape, the De Laceys were exiled to Ger-
many without being allowed to take any of their money
with them. Even worse, Felix had lost Safie. Now she
had escaped her father and come to them, and Felix was
happy once more.
All this the monster learned later on. But what princi-
pally affected him about Safie's arrival was the fact that
she could not speak the cottagers' language. The monster
watched them use signs at first and then understood, be-
cause Safie kept repeating certain sounds, that she was
trying to learn their language. The idea instantly struck
the monster that he could make use of the same lessons.
His summer days were spent in close attention, and it
pleased the monster to find that he learned even more
quickly than Safie. His speech organs were harsh but
supple, and while Safie spoke in broken accents and un-
derstood little, the monster understood and could imitate
almost every word that was spoken.
Because Felix read often from history books, the mon-
ster gained a knowledge of the manners, governments
40 FRANKENSTEIN
and religions of the different nations of the earth. He
heard about the ancient history of Asia, about the genius
of the Grecians, the wars and virtues of the early Ro-
mans, and also about the decline of that mighty empire,
and the rise of chivalry, Christianity and kings. He
heard of the discovery of America, and wept over the
fate of the Indians.
These stories gave the monster strange feelings.
"Was man," he thought, "at once so powerful, so
virtuous, and magnificent, yet so cruel and mean? How
can he be at one moment so evil and, at another, so no-
ble and godlike? How can men murder each other, and
why is there need for law and government?"
Then, as Felix read on to Safie, the monster learned
the strange system of human society. He heard of the di-
vision of property, of great wealth and terrible poverty,
of rank, family and noble blood. At length he under-
stood that the possessions most valued by human beings
were social position and riches. Without either of these, a
man was doomed to waste his powers working for the
profit of the chosen few. These words made the monster
think of himself.
"And what am I?" he reflected. "I know nothing of my
beginning. I have no money, no friends, no kind of prop-
erty. I have a face and figure hideously deformed and
loathsome, and I am not even of the same nature as a
man. I am more agile. I can live on coarser food. I can
stand heat and cold better than they. I am even much
larger than they are. But when I look around, I see and
REJECTION 4]
hear of none like me. Am I then a monster, a blot upon
the earth, from which-all men will flee and which all
men will disown?"
These thoughts left him in agony. He tried to dispel
them, but sorrow only increased with knowledge. He
wished now that he had remained forever in the forest
and had learned nothing beyond his first sensations of
hunger, thirst and heat.
"How strange knowledge is," considered the monster.
"It clings to the mind like moss on a rock."
He wished sometimes to shake off all thought and
feeling, but he learned that there was but one means to
overcome the sensation of pain, and that was death-a
state which he feared yet did not understand. He ad-
mired virtue and good feelings and loved the gentle
manners of his cottagers, but he was shut out from them.
All he could do was watch them, and this increased,
rather than satisfied, the desire he had of becoming one
among their company. He was alone, a miserable and
unhappy wretch.
Other lessons were impressed upon him even more
deeply. He heard of the difference between men and
women, and the birth and growth of children. He heard
how the father protected his children, and how all the
life and cares of the mother were wrapped up in her
family. He learned of brothers and sisters, and all the
various relationships which bind one human being to
another in mutual bonds.
"Yet where are my friends and relations,' >
whispered
42 FRANKENSTEIN
REJECTION 43
the monster to his lonely walls. "No father watched my
infant days. No mother blessed me with smiles and ca-
resses. Or if they did, I do not remember. My only knowl-
edge of myself is that I have always been, in height and
proportion, exactly as I am now. I have never seen a
being who resembles me or one who might claim me.
What am I?"
He asked the question over and over again, and for
answer heard only his own hoarse moan.
While the monster improved his speech, he also
learned the science of letters as it was taught to Safie.
Before long, he knew how to read, and even to write,
practicing his letters on the dirt floor of his hovel with a
stick.
So far, the monster still looked upon crime as a distant
evil. Goodness and generosity were always before him in
the lives of his protectors, his affectionate name for the
De Laceys.
Then one night, in the beginning of the month of Au-
gust, the monster was in the woods collecting food for
himself and fuel for the cottagers' fire. As he searched
about, he came upon a trunk filled with clothes and
books. The clothes were even smaller than his own ill-
fitting jacket and trousers and he left them. But the
books he seized eagerly and carried off to his hovel.
As he studied the books and pored over their contents,
the monster's mind received many new images and great-
er impressions than before. So far, the cottage of his pro-
tectors had been the only school in which he had studied
44 FRANKENSTEIN
human nature, but these new books developed his mind
even more. As he read the histories and the romantic
tales, the monster became convinced in his admiration
for virtue and his hatred of vice.
But one of the books, Paradise Lost, excited in him dif-
ferent and far deeper emotions. Reading the story of
God warring with his creatures filled the monster with
wonder and awe. Then he began to compare his own sit-
uation with the characters in the story.
Like Adam, the monster was alone. But with what a dif-
ference! Adam had come forth from the hands of God a
perfect creature, happy and prosperous, guarded by the
especial care of his Creator, and allowed to talk with and
be guided by his God.
"But I am alone," reflected the monster. "Wretched,
helpless and alone."
Many times he considered himself closer to Satan, for
often, like Satan, when he saw the bliss of his protectors,
the bitter gall of envy rose within him.
To make matters worse, soon afterward, the monster
found some papers in the pocket of his jacket, the jacket
he had taken the night he left Frankenstein's laboratory.
Now he was to discover Dr. Victor Frankenstein!
With trembling hands, the monster clutched the papers
and read. They were Frankenstein's journal of the four
months that preceded his own creation. In the papers
was described every single step in the progress of Fran-
kenstein's work. Everything was written which bore refer-
ence to the monster's accursed origin, all the disgusting
REJECTION 45
details of his creation, the minutest description of his
odious and loathsome-person. All of it was written in
language which painted Frankenstein's own horrors of his
work, and it was this which stamped forever on the mon-
ster a horror of himself.
He sickened as he read.
"Hateful day when I received life!" he exclaimed in
agony. "Accursed creator! Why did you form a monster
so hideous that even you turned from me in disgust?
God, in pity, made man beautiful, after His own image.
But my form is a filthy type of yours, more horrid even
from the very resemblance. Satan had his companions,
fellow-devils, to admire and encourage him. But I am
solitary and eae)
These were the monster's thoughts in his solitude.
But when he observed the virtues of the cottagers,
their generous and kindly habits, he persuaded himself
that they would be compassionate about his deformity
and love him because he loved them. Could they turn
from their door one who, however monstrous, needed so
much their compassion and friendship?
He waited some months longer, the more to learn and
the better to prepare himself. The happiness and the con-
tentment of the cottagers increased. Every day, their feel-
ings grew more serene and peaceful, while the monster's
became every day more agitated. Increase of knowledge
only discovered to him more clearly what an outcast he
was. He cherished hope now and then, it is true. But all
he had to do was to see his person reflected in water, or
46 FRANKENSTEIN
his shadow in the moonshine, to know that his being
loved was all a dream.
"There will be no Eve to soothe my sorrows or share
my thoughts. I am alone."
He remembered Adam's prayer to his Creator. But
where was his? He had been abandoned, and in the bit-
terness of his heart, he cursed his creator.
Autumn passed. The monster saw, with surprise and
grief, the leaves decay and fall, and nature again assume
the barren and bleak appearance it had worn when he
first saw the woods and the lovely moon one year before.
Yet the bleakness of the weather did not bother him. He
had found that he was better fitted for the endurance of
cold than heat. But his chief delights were the sight of
the flowers, the birds and all the gay colors of summer.
When those deserted the monster, he turned with even
more attention to the cottagers. Their happiness was not
lessened by the absence of summer. They loved and sym-
pathized with one another, and their joys, depending' on
each other, were not cut off as the monster's were, by the
coming of winter.
The more he saw of them, the greater became his de-
sire to claim their protection and kindness. His heart
yearned to be known and loved by these kindly crea-
tures. To see their sweet looks directed toward him with
affection was all his ambition. He dared not think that
they would turn them from him with disdain and horror.
The poor that stopped at their door were never driven
away. He asked, it was true, for greater treasures than a
REJECTION 47
little food or rest. He needed kindness and sympathy.
But he did not believe himself utterly unworthy of it.
The winter advanced, and all the monster thought
about was his plan of introducing himself into the cot-
tage of his protectors. He pondered different ways, but
the plan on which he finally decided was to enter the
cottage when the blind old man was alone. He was wise
enough to discover that the unnatural hideousness of his
person was what had frightened people before. But the
old man could not see and so would not be frightened.
The monster's voice, although harsh, had nothing terrible
in it. He thought, therefore, that if he could just make
friends with the old man first, the old man might help
him gain the friendship of the young people.
One day, when the sun shone cheerfully on the fallen
red leaves, Felix, Agatha and Safie departed on a long
country walk, and the old man, on his own desire, was
left alone in the cottage. After they had gone, the old
man took up his guitar and began to play softly.
The monster's heart beat quick. This was the hour and
moment of trial which would decide his hopes or realize
his fears. Save for the music, all was silent in and around
the cottage. It was a perfect opportunity, yet when the
monster rose, his limbs failed and he sank to the ground. |
Again he rose, and made himself firmly remove the
planks which concealed the entrance to his retreat. The
fresh air revived him, and with renewed courage, he
went to the door of the cottage and knocked.
"Who is there?" said the old man. "Come in."
48 FRANKENSTEIN
The monster entered. "Pardon me," he said. "I am a
traveler in want of a little rest."
"Enter," said Mr. De Lacey. "Sit before the fire. I am
sorry that my children are not here. I am blind, you see,
and it might be difficult for me to find food for you."
The old man raised his sightless eyes and smiled.
"Do not trouble yourself, kind sir," said the monster.
"T have food. It is only warmth and rest that I need."
The old man nodded his welcome. The monster sat
down in silence. He did not know what to say next, or
how to begin his plea. His large hands trembled and he
breathed heavily.
At length the old man spoke. "By your language,
stranger, I suppose you are my countryman. Are you
French?"
"No," answered the monster. "But I was educated by a
French family and understand that language. I am now
going to claim the protection of some friends, whom I
sincerely love, and who I hope will receive me kindly."
The monster paused. "I am an unfortunate and deserted
creature. I look around and I have no relation or friend
upon earth. These kind people to whom I go have never
seen me, and know little of me. I am full of fears, for if I
fail there, I am an outcast in the world forever."
"Do not despair. To be friendless is indeed to be un-
fortunate. But the hearts of men, unless they are blinded
by self-interest, are full of brotherly love and charity.
Rely, therefore, on your hopes. If these friends are kind,
do not give up hope," said the old man.
REJECTION 49.
"They are kind," answered the monster. "They are the
best creatures in the world. But unfortunately, they are
prejudiced against me. I have a good disposition. My life
has been harmless and even a little helpful. But a fatal
prejudice clouds their eyes, and where they ought to see
a feeling and kind friend in me, they behold a detestable
monster."
"That is indeed unfortunate. But if you are truly
blameless, can't you make them see the truth?" the old
man asked.
"T am about to try, and that is why I am so fright-
ened," sighed the monster. "I tenderly love these friends.
I have, for many months, been doing small kindnesses
for them. But they believe I wish to injure them and that
is the prejudice I wish to overcome."
"Where do these friends live?" the old man asked.
"Near this spot," the monster replied.
The old man paused and then continued. "If you will
tell me your whole story and all that troubles you, per-
haps I can be of help. I am blind, and cannot judge your
face, but there is something in your words which per-
suades me that you are sincere. I am poor and an exile.
But it will give me great pleasure to be of any service to
a human creature."
"Excellent man!" cried the monster. "I thank you, and
accept your generous offer. You raise me from despair
by this kindness. And I hope that with your aid, I shall
not be driven from the society and sympathy of your
fellow-creatures."
50 FRANKENSTEIN
'Heaven forbid!" answered the old man. "Even if you
were really a criminal, to be driven out can only make
you desperate and never virtuous. I also am unfortunate.
I and my family have been condemned, although inno-
cent. Judge, therefore, if I do not feel for your mis-
fortunes."
"How can I thank you, my best and only benefactor?"
exclaimed the monster. "From your lips first have I
heard the voice of kindness. I shall be forever grateful.
And your kindness gives me hope that the friends I am
going to meet will also be kind."
"May I know the names and address of these friends?"
inquired the old man.
The monster paused. This, he thought, was the mo-
ment of decision, which was to rob him of, or give him,
happiness forever. He tried hard to answer the old man's
question, but he had no strength left to speak. He sank
on the chair and sobbed aloud.
At that moment he heard the steps of his younger pro-
tectors. He had not a moment to lose. Seizing the hand
of the old man, he cried, '""Now is the time!-save and
protect me! You and your family are the friends whom I
seek. Do not desert me in the hour of trial!"
"Great God!" exclaimed the old man. "Who are you?"
At that instant the cottage door was opened, and Felix,
Safie and Agatha entered. Their horror and fear flashed
before the monster's eyes. Agatha fainted. Safie rushed
from the cottage. Felix leaped forward, and with brute
force, tore the monster away from his father to whose
REJECTION 51
knees the monster clung. In a wild fury, Felix dashed the
monster to the ground and hit him violently with a stick.
The monster stood up. He could have torn Felix limb
from limb as the lion tears the antelope. But the mon-
ster's heart was full of bitter sickness, and he did not
touch the young man. He saw Felix on the point of rais-
ing the stick again, when, overcome by pain and anguish,
the monster ran from the cottage and escaped, unseen, to
his hovel.
"Cursed, cursed creator!" moaned the monster.
Why did he live? Why, in that instant, did he not ex-
tinguish the spark of existence which his creator had so
carelessly bestowed? He did not know. Despair had not
yet taken possession of the monster. His feelings were
those of rage and revenge. He could with pleasure have
destroyed the cottage and its people and have glutted
himself with their shrieks and misery.
When night came, the monster left the hovel and wan-
dered in the woods. Now, no longer restrained by the
fear of discovery, he gave vent to his anguish in fearful
howlings. He was like a wild beast, destroying objects
that got in his way and ranging through the woods as
swiftly as a stag. What a miserable night he passed! The
cold stars shone in mockery, and the bare trees waved
their branches above him. All, save him, were resting or
enjoying themselves. He, like the arch-fiend, bore a hell
within him. Finding himself abandoned, he wished to
tear up the trees, spread. havoc) and destruction around
him, and then to sit down and enjoy the ruin.
Sy FRANKENSTEIN
But this was too much sensation to last. He grew tired
with so much exertion and sank on the damp grass in the
sick powerlessness of despair. There were none in all
the world to pity or help him. Should he feel kindness
toward his enemies? No. From that moment, he declared
everlasting war against all mankind, and more than all,
against the man who had formed him and sent him forth
to his miserable agony.
The sun rose. The monster heard the voices of men
and realized that it was too late to go back to his hovel
that day. He hid in some underbrush and devoted the
day to thinking.
The pleasant sunshine and the pure air of the day
restored him to some degree of tranquility. He began to
believe that maybe what had happened was his own
fault. If only he had made friends with the old man
slowly. He was a fool in exposing his person to the hor-
ror of the young people. They ought to have been
warned, prepared. Little by little, the monster convinced
himself that all was not lost, that he would try again. At
night, he crept forth from his hiding place, went in
search of food to appease his hunger, and then returned
to his hovel. All was at peace, and he waited, in silent
expectation for the sun and the cottagers to rise.
The sun rose at last and mounted high in the heavens,
but the cottagers did not appear. The monster trembled
violently, wondering whether some misfortune had oc-
curred. The inside of the cottage was dark, and he heard
no motion. His suspense became an agony.
REJECTION 53
Later in the day, two countrymen paused beside the
cottage. They were soon joined by Felix.
"Must you really move out of the cottage so soon?"
asked one of the men. "You will be losing three months'
rent and the vegetables in your garden."
"I don't care," replied Felix, while the monster, hiding
unseen, strained to catch every word. "We can never live
in your cottage again. I have told you what happened. It
has made my father very ill, and my wife and sister will
never recover from their horror. Take your cottage back
with no further discussion and let me fly from this
place."
The monster saw Felix and his companions go into the
cottage and come out a few minutes later. The monster
never saw any of the De Lacey family again.
He stayed in his hovel for the rest of the day in a state
of utter and stupid grief. His protectors had gone and
had broken the only link that held him to the world. For
the first time feelings of revenge and hatred filled him
without his trying to control them. When he thought of
his cottagers, of the mild voice of the old man, the gentle
look of Agatha, the beauty of Safie, tears gushed from
his eyes. But then, when he reflected that they had
spurned and deserted him, anger returned, a wild rage of
anger. The horrible scene two days before haunted his
vision-the females flying, the enraged Felix tearing him
from the father's feet.
Furious, the monster, unable to injure anything hu-
man, turned his anger toward inanimate objects. As night
54 FRANKENSTEIN
came, he placed straw and other inflammable stuff
around the cottage. Then he destroyed the garden and
waited for the moon to sink.
In the night a fierce wind arose from the woods. The
blast tore along like a night avalanche and produced a
kind of insanity in the monster's spirits which burst all
bounds of reason. He lighted the dry branch of a tree,
and danced with fury around the cottage. With a loud
scream, he fired the straw and heath and bushes which
he had collected. The wind fanned the fire, and the cot-
tage was quickly enveloped by the flames, which clung to
it, and licked it with their forked and destroying tongues.
When he knew that the cottage was entirely destroyed,
the monster screamed in agony and hatred once more
and retreated backwards to seek refuge in the woods. -
"oJ 4 |e
THAT NIGHT and all the next day the monster spent ram-
paging through the woods. On the second evening he
sank in exhaustion near the rim of the pool where,
months before, he had first seen his own image reflected
in the clear water. The late autumn moon rose, and by
its light he saw himself again. Only this time he knew
what he had not known then-the terrible cost of his un-
natural appearance.
"I must leave here," thought the monster. "There is
too much to remind me of what I have lost."
~ But where? Where, with the whole world before him,
should he turn his face? Hated and despised, he knew
that every country must be equally horrible. Puzzling the
matter over and over, he sat throughout the night,
wrapped in his cloak, on the cold, hard ground.
As morning dawned, at length he thought of Franken-
stein. Those papers he had found in the pocket of his
jacket had told him that Frankenstein was his creator, his
56 FRANKENSTEIN
father. And to whom could the monster apply with more
fitness than to the one who had given him life?
Among the lessons Felix had given Safie was geogra-
phy. The monster had learned a little about the locations
of the different countries of the earth. In the papers,
Geneva was mentioned as the name of Dr. Franken-
stein's native town. It was to Geneva that the monster
decided to go.
But how was he to direct himself? He knew that he
was now in southern Germany and that to reach Geneva
he must travel in a southwesterly direction. But the sun
was his only guide. He had no compass. He did not
know the names of the towns that he was to pass
through, nor could he ask information from a single hu-
man being. Only from Frankenstein could he hope for
help, although LOWES Frankenstein he felt nothing but
hatred.
"Unfeeling, heartless creator!" the monster cried in the
moonlight. "You endowed me with perceptions and pas-
sions and then cast me out, an object for the scorn and
horror of mankind."
But only on Frankenstein had the monster any claim
for pity and help, and from him the monster determined
to seek the justice he could not hope to find in any other
human being.
The monster slept that day and began his journey the
following night. He knew his travels would be long and
his suffering intense as he left the place where he had
lived for nearly a year. He traveled only at night, afraid
REVENGE 57
to encounter the face of a human being. As he went
through the mountains of southern Germany, nature de-
cayed around him and the sun lost its heat. Rain and
snow poured down on him and he saw that the mighty
rivers were frozen. The surface of the earth was hard and
chill and bare, and he found no shelter. How often did
the monster scream curses on the cause of his being! The
mildness of his nature had fled, and all within him was
turned to gall and bitterness. The nearer he approached
Switzerland and Frankenstein's home, the more deeply
did he feel the spirit of revenge kindle in his heart.
Snow fell and the waters hardened, but the monster
did not rest. In a leather wallet lost on a twisting moun-
tain trail, the monster found a map of the country. This,
and now and then a sign, helped to direct him, but he
often wandered wide from his path. The agony of his
feelings left him no peace, and every small incident
was food for his rage and misery. There was one incident
especially that confirmed the bitterness and horror of his
feelings.
After four months of painful exposure and near starva-
tion as he traversed the cold German landscape, the
monster arrived in the northeast part of Switzerland. The
sun had begun to recover its warmth and the earth to
look green. Though he generally only traveled by night,
one morning the monster found that his path lay through
a deep wood. So dense was the wood that the monster
thought he might be able to continue his journey unseen
even after the sun had risen.
58 FRANKENSTEIN
The day, which was one of the first of spring, cheered
even him by the loveliness of its sunshine and the balmi-
ness of the air. Emotions of gentleness and pleasure that
had long seemed dead arose within him. Half surprised
by these unexpected feelings, he allowed himself to be
carried away by them, and forgetting his solitude and de-
formity, he dared to be happy. Soft tears again wet his
cheeks, and he even raised his eyes with thankfulness to-
ward the blessed sun which bestowed such joy on him.
He continued to wind among the paths of the wood
until he came to its edge, which was skirted by a deep
and rapid river. Trees bent their branches into the river,
and the branches were now budding with the fresh
spring. Here the monster paused, not exactly knowing
which way to go, when he heard the sound of voices.
Quickly, he hid himself under the shade of a cypress. He
was scarcely hid when a little girl came running toward
the place where the monster had concealed himself. She
was laughing as if she were being chased in a game. The
monster smiled in pleasure at the sight of her, her braids
flying, as she ran along the steep riverbank.
Suddenly, as the monster watched, the little girl's foot
slipped and she fell into the rapid current of the water.
He rushed from his hiding place, plunged into the river,
and with a great effort fought his way through the cur-
rent. He managed to save the little girl and drag her to
shore. She was senseless. Gently the monster held her,
and not knowing what else to do, sat down with the little
girl on his lap and began to pat her cheeks.
REVENGE 59
60 FRANKENSTEIN
In a moment the underbrush parted and a man ap-
peared. With a look of horror and disbelief on his face,
he dashed forward and tore the little girl from the mon-
ster's arms. With staring eyes, he backed away, turned,
and began to run into the deeper parts of the wood.
Without thinking, the monster followed.
"Don't run away," he called out. "You have nothing to
fear from me. I did not hurt your daughter. I only pulled
her from the river. Please . . . wait-"
The monster's long strides allowed him to catch up
with the man rapidly. As he moved forward, his arms
outstretched, the man turned, his eyes wild with anger
and terror. When the monster drew near, the man aimed
a gun which he had been carrying. He pointed the gun at
the monster's body and fired. The monster fell to the
ground, and the man, with increased swiftness, escaped
into the wood.
This then was the reward of the monster's benevo-
lence. He had saved a human being from destruction,
and, in return, he now writhed under the miserable pain
of a wound which shattered his flesh and bone.
The feelings of kindness and gentleness which had
filled him only a few moments before gave place to hell-
ish rage. The monster gnashed his teeth. Inflamed by
pain, he vowed eternal hatred and vengeance to all man-
kind. But the agony of his wound overcame him. His
pulse weakened and he fainted.
For some weeks he led a woeful life in the woods,
trying to cure his own wound. The bullet had entered his
REVENGE 61
shoulder, and he did not know whether it had remained
there or passed through. At any rate, he had no means of
taking the bullet out. His sufferings were increased also
by the terrible sense of injustice and by the ingratitude
which had caused his pain. His daily vow was for re-
venge-a deep and deadly revenge, which alone would
compensate for the outrages and anguish he had endured.
After several weeks his wound healed and he contin-
ued his journey. The agony he endured was no longer to
be brightened by the warm sun or gentle breezes of
spring. All joy was but a mockery, which insulted his
loneliness and made him feel more painfully that he was
not made for enjoyment or pleasure.
It took him two months to cross Switzerland, avoiding
as he must the easier, well-traveled roads. Searching his
way among the steep Alpine passes, descending into val-
leys only to climb again, the monster moved on. It was
late in the spring when his tortuous journey drew to a
close, and he reached the outskirts of Geneva.
It was evening when he arrived. He looked immediate-
ly for a hiding place in the fields near the town. He
wanted to think in what manner he ought to approach
Frankenstein. He was tired and hungry and far too un-
happy to look with pleasure at the greenness of the fields
or the golden sun setting beyond the eastern mountains
of Jura. He moved closer to the town and found refuge
among some trees in a lovely park just outside the walls
of Geneva.
In the soft early evening, the monster fell asleep.
62 FRANKENSTEIN
At dusk a movement in the bushes which encircled the
small clearing where the monster slept startled him
awake. Before the monster had time to withdraw and
hide, a little boy darted into the clearing. He could not
have been more than five years old. His sturdy figure was
clothed in a blue velvet suit the color of his thickly lashed
eyes, and curling hair framed his face which was rosy with
health. The delighted laughter of his game of hide-and-
seek dimpled his cheeks. He did not yet see the monster.
As he gazed at the little child, the monster was
entranced, and an idea came into his mind.
"Surely this little creature has lived too short a time to
have learned a horror for deformity,' the monster
thought hopefully. "He is too little to mind my ugliness.
If I catch him, I can teach him to be my companion and
friend. Then I will not be so alone on this peopled earth."
In his need for a friend, the monster crept up behind
the child, who was peering out through the bushes. The
monster stretched out a large, scarred hand, grabbed the
little boy and spun him around.
When the boy saw the monster's face, the smile froze on
his lips, and he covered his terrified eyes with his little
hands and screamed.
The monster forced the boy's hands from his eyes and
said, "Child, don't scream. Do not cover your eyes. There
is no need to be afraid of me. I shall not hurt you. Listen
loemie:2
The boy struggled violently.
"Let me go!" he cried. "Let me go, monster! You are
REVENGE 63
ugly, you wish to eat me. You will tear me to pieces, you
are an ogre! Let me go or I will tell my father!"
The monster held the boy tighter between his hands.
"Boy, you are not going to see your father again,"
cried the monster. "You must come with me and be my
friend now."
The little boy hit the monster with his small fists and
continued to scream.
"Ugly monster!" he cried. "Let me go. My father is a
very important man. He is Mr. Frankenstein. He will
punish you! You do not dare to keep me!"
The monster's black lips parted horribly, drawn back
from the ghastly white teeth.
"Frankenstein!" he hissed. "You belong then to my
enemy-to him toward whom I have sworn eternal re-
venge. I shall indeed carry you off and you shall be my
boy, not his!"
The child still struggled in the monster's grasp, twisting
and turning and crying out the worst insults he could
think of.
"You ugly thing, no boy would want to come with
you," the child shrieked. "You are too horrible for anyone
in the whole world to want to be your friend! Ugly, ugly,
ugly," yelled the boy.
The words carried a greater and greater despair to the
monster's heart. He could bear them no more. With tears
in his eyes, he grasped the child's throat to silence him.
In a moment the boy lay at his feet.
It was an accident. The monster had not meant to at-
FRANKENSTEIN 64
REVENGE 65
tack the boy. But as he rose and gazed down upon his
victim, the monster felt his heart swell with a hellish
triumph. Clapping his hands insanely, he exclained:
"I, too, can create desolation and despair! My enemy
Dr. Frankenstein can be hurt as well as I. This accident
will bring unhappiness to him, and a thousand other mis-
eries shall torment and destroy him!"
As the monster fixed his eyes on the child, he saw
something glittering on the child's breast. He took it. It
was a locket, and inside the locket there was the tiny
painting of a most lovely woman. In spite of the mon-
ster's evil mood, the picture softened and fascinated him.
For a few moments he gazed with delight on her dark
eyes, fringed by deep lashes, and her lovely lips. But
soon the monster's rage returned. He remembered that
he was never to be allowed the delights of such beautiful
creatures, and that whoever the woman was, she would
look at him, not with the pleasant expression of the pic-
ture, but with fear and disgust.
Thinking such thoughts, the monster ground his teeth
in fury.
"Why do I stand here in my agony?" he cried against
the darkening sky. "Why do I not rush among mankind
and perish in the attempt to destroy them?"
The monster staggered out of the clearing and from
the park he crossed a country field, seeking a place to
hide from his crime.
There was nowhere, nowhere for him to go. Almost
out of his mind, for a long time he ran madly in circles.
66 FRANKENSTEIN
Then across one of the fields he saw a barn. As he
came closer he heard no sound. He thought the barn
must be empty so he went inside.
The barn was not empty. As the monster's eyes grew
accustomed to the dark, he saw that a young woman was
sleeping on some straw. Silently, the monster bent over
her in the dark.
a] 5 |e
The Horrible Truth
FOR SEVERAL months after the monster escaped, Dr.
Frankenstein lay ill of a nervous fever. During all that
time, Henry Clerval was his only nurse, taking care of
him and watching over his friend day and night. Henry
did not tell the Frankenstein family how serious Victor's
illness was because he knew how the news would worry
Victor's father and how unhappy it would make
Elizabeth.
But Frankenstein was in reality very ill. Only such
constant care as Henry's could have restored him to
health. In Frankenstein's delirium, the form of the mon-
ster to whom he had given life was forever before his
eyes, and he spoke of the monster feverishly in the man-
ner of someone crying out in a nightmare. Henry be-
lieved Victor's words to be the wanderings of a disturbed
imagination, though after a while he did come to think
that his friend's sickness was indeed due to some strange
and terrible event.
68 FRANKENSTEIN
Slowly, and with many relapses, Frankenstein recov-
ered. When he was first able to sit up and look out the
window with pleasure, he saw that November's fallen
leaves had disappeared and that the green leaves of April
were shooting forth from the trees. It was a divine spring,
and the season helped greatly in making him better. Lit-
tle by little, his gloom departed.
"Dear Clerval," he exclaimed, "how kind, how very
good you are to me. You've spent this whole winter, not
in study as you promised yourself, but wasting your time
in my sick room. How shall I ever repay you?"
"You will repay me entirely if you get well as speedily
as you can," answered Clerval smiling. "And since you
appear in such good spirits, I may speak to you on one
subject, may I not?"
Frankenstein trembled. One subject! What could it be?
Could he mean the one horrible thing about which
Frankenstein did not even dare to think?
"Be calm," said Clerval, who saw Frankenstein grow
pale. "I will not mention it, if it upsets you. But your
father and Elizabeth will be very happy if they receive
a letter from you in your own handwriting. They are so
worried about you."
"Is that all, my dear Henry?" smiled Frankenstein. "I
shall be only too glad to write a letter to those I love so
dearly."
"Then perhaps you will also be glad to read this letter
from Elizabeth," said Clerval. "It came for you some days 99
ago.
THE HORRIBLE TRUTH 69
"My own dear Elizabeth," cried Frankenstein, reach-
ing for the letter and opening it.
"My DEAREST VICTOR," the letter began. "You have
been ill, very ill, and even Henry's kind letters do not
reassure me that you are better. One line from you,
written in your own hand, is necessary to calm my own
and your father's fears for you. If we do not hear from
you soon, we shall ourselves come to Ingolstadt. Henry,
who has been so good a friend to you, to all of us, writes
that you are getting better. We hope with all our hearts
that this is true and wait for a letter from you to prove it.
"Get well and return to us. You have been away so
long, nearly five years. Do return, and you will find a
happy, cheerful home and friends who love you dearly.
Your father's health is excellent, and he asks only to see
you. Ernest is sixteen years old now and wishes for a
military career. He is not the brilliant student you are,
so perhaps a military career is best for him. I must tell
you, too, about our darling little William. I wish you could
see him. He is very tall for his age, and when he smiles,
two little dimples appear on each cheek. He is so bright,
and he charms us all. He has already had one or two
little wives, but Louisa Biron is his favorite, a pretty
little girl five years old.
"Do you remember Justine, the young girl we took
into our household, who has always served us so faith-
fully and who took care of your mother during her last
illness? You used to say just one glance from her cheered
you. She is so clever and gentle with William and we
love her so much. She sends you her best regards.
"Little change, except the growth of our children, has
taken place since you left us. The blue lake and the
snow-clad mountains never change nor does our con-
tented, happy home. Write, dearest Victor-one line-
70 FRANKENSTEIN
one word will be a blessing to us. Ten thousand thanks
to Henry for his kindness, his affection, and his many
letters. We are sincerely grateful. Take care of yourself,
I beg you, Victor, and I beg you, write!
ELIZABETH"
"Dear, dear Elizabeth," exclaimed Frankenstein, when
he had read her letter. "I will write her immediately that
they need not worry about me any more."
Less than two weeks later, Frankenstein was able to
leave his room. His first duty was to introduce Clerval to
the professors of the university of Ingolstadt. In doing
this, he suffered badly.
Ever since the fatal night, the end of his labors, and
the beginning of his misfortunes, he had undergone a
violent dislike even for the name of natural science. Just
the sight of a chemical instrument would renew his ner-
vous symptoms. Henry saw this, and had removed all
Frankenstein's apparatus from view. He also changed
Frankenstein's apartment, for Henry saw that his friend
hated the room which had been his laboratory. But these
cares of Clerval's became useless when Frankenstein vis-
ited the professors. When Professor Waldman praised
Frankenstein's astonishing progress in the sciences, Fran-
kenstein felt tormented by the reminder of where his
work had led him. He writhed under Waldman's words,
yet dared say nothing. Clerval noticed Frankenstein's
pain, but he asked no questions of his friend. Franken-
stein was grateful, for though he loved Clerval, he could
never bring himself to speak of the horrors of that night.
THE HORRIBLE TRUTH fit
Professor Krempe was even worse than Professor
Waldman.
"T tell you, Clerval, your friend Frankenstein has out-
stripped us all. Stare if you please, but it is nevertheless
true. This young man is superior in brilliance to every
professor at this university. His future will astound us, I
am sure," said Professor Krempe. Noticing that Franken-
stein had turned pale, he added, "How modest you are,
Frankenstein. You do not like such praise?"
For once Frankenstein was glad that Clerval had never
shared his taste for natural science. Henry had come to
the university to make himself master of oriental lan-
guages and literature, and Frankenstein, hating his own
former studies, now joined Clerval as a fellow pupil in
Persian, Arabic, and Sanskrit.
Summer passed away in these studies, and Franken-
stein's return to Geneva was fixed for the end of autumn.
But winter and snow arrived too early, the roads were
impossible to travel, and his journey was put off until
spring. The friends passed the winter cheerfully in Ingol-
stadt, and early in the spring took short trips into the
countryside.
"Dear Henry," said Frankenstein gratefully. "You
have brought me back to health and good spirits. Once
again I can enjoy the beauty of nature and the excellent
conversation of a friend. Too long I selfishly shut myself
up for a single purpose, but now I am free from it and
shall never think of it again."
"T am glad to see you so happy, Victor,' >
said Henry,
72 FRANKENSTEIN
as they walked in the forest near Ingolstadt on the Sun-
day before Frankenstein's return to Geneva.
It was a glorious spring day. The flowers of the season
bloomed in the hedges, the sky was a clear, lovely blue,
and the air was fresh and invigorating. Clerval was de-
lighted to see his friend enjoy it all.
In the evening they returned to their rooms in the
highest spirits. There was a letter waiting for Franken-
stein from his father.
"My DEAR VICTOR," it said. "You have waited for this
note, no doubt, to let you know that we expect you. At
first I was only going to write you a few lines to wel-
come you. But that would be a cruel kindness, and I
dare not do it. What would be your surprise, my son,
when you expected a happy and glad welcome, to see us
all in tears and misery?. And now, Victor, how can I tell
you of our misfortune? How can I give such pain to my
long absent son? I wish to prepare you for the terrible
news.
"William has been injured-that sweet child, whose
smiles delighted and warmed my heart, who was so
gentle, yet so gay!
"T will tell you now how it happened.
"Last Thursday (May 7th), I, Elizabeth, and your two
brothers went to walk outside the town in Plainpalais
Park. The evening was warm and quiet, and we walked
farther than usual. It was already dusk before we thought
of returning. Then we discovered that William and Ernest,
who had been walking ahead of us, were not to be found.
We rested on a bench for a while until they should re-
turn. Soon Ernest came, and asked if we had seen his
brother. He said that he had been playing hide-and-seek
with William and that William had run away to hide
THE HORRIBLE TRUTH 73
himself. Ernest had looked for him, could not find him,
waited for him. William did not return.
"Ernest's story worried us, and we continued to search
for William until night fell, when Elizabeth suggested
that he might have returned to the house. He was not
there. We went back to the park with torches, for I could
not rest thinking that my sweet boy had lost himself and
was exposed to all the damps and dews of night. Eliza-
beth also suffered extremely. About five in the morning I
discovered my lovely boy, whom the night before I had
seen blooming and in active health, stretched on the grass
pale and motionless. The finger-prints of his attacker were
plain in the bruises on my boy's throat.
"T carried William home. The worry on my face alarmed
Elizabeth and she rushed to see William. She examined
William, and then William's neck and clothes. Finally,
she burst into tears and exclaimed, 'Oh God! It is all
my fault!'
"She fainted and was restored with extreme difficulty.
Then she told me that before our walk, William had
begged and begged her to let him wear a very valuable
locket that she possessed of your mother. The locket is
gone and was doubtless what tempted the attacker. We
have no trace of him at present, though we make every
effort to discover who he was.
"William will not, or can not, speak. The doctors say
he may be better in time, but as yet the boy can give us
no help in discovering the identity of the attacker. He
was so badly frightened, poor child.
"Come, dear Victor. Only you can console Elizabeth.
She weeps constantly and accuses herself unjustly as the
sole cause of William's accident. Your dear mother! Alas,
Victor! I now say, Thank God she did not live to witness
this cruel, miserable attack upon her youngest darling!
"Come home quickly, Victor. We need your love and
consolation. Your affectionate and unhappy father.
ALPHONSE FRANKENSTEIN"
74 FRANKENSTEIN
Clerval, who had watched Frankenstein's face as he
read the letter, was surprised to see his friend's happy
expression turn to despair. Frankenstein threw the letter
on the table and covered his face with his hands.
"My dear Frankenstein," said Henry, "are you always
to be unhappy? My dear friend, what has happened?"
Frankenstein motioned to Clerval to read the letter
and began to pace the room.
"What can I say to you, my friend?" cried Clerval.
'How awful this is!) What do you intend to do?"
"To go instantly to Geneva. Come with me, Henry, to
order the horses and carriage," answered Frankenstein.
During their walk, Clerval tried to comfort Franken-
stein. He could only express his heartfelt sympathy.
"Poor William," he said. "That dear, lovely child. To
have been attacked so mercilessly, to feel his attacker's
grasp, and now to lie, ill and terrorized, with such a
memory to haunt his little mind. Poor little fellow, how
dreadful for him. How dreadful for all of you!" ,
In a daze, Frankenstein thanked Clerval for his sym-
pathetic words. They arrived at the inn, ordered the
horses, and in less than an hour, Frankenstein bade fare-
well to his friend.
His journey was very melancholy. At first he wished to
hurry on, for he longed to console and sympathize with
his loved and sorrowing family. But when he drew near
his native town, he slowed his progress. He could hardly
bear the strong feelings that crowded into his mind at the
sight of so many scenes familiar to his youth. He had
THE HORRIBLE TRUTH TS
been away for nearly six years-two years of study, two
years working on his ghastly experiments, half a year ill,
and a little more than a year studying with Henry Cler-
val. Frankenstein wondered how much might have
changed in all that time. But more than the wondering
made him slow his journey. A sudden fear came over
him. He dared not go on. He dreaded, he knew not why,
a thousand nameless evils.
He remained for two days at Lausanne, gazing at the
calm lake and the snowy mountains. By degrees, the
calm and beautiful scene made him feel better, and he
continued his journey to Geneva.
The road ran beside Lake Geneva. He could see the
black sides of the Jura mountains and the bright summit
of Mont Blanc. He wept like a child.
"Dear mountains! My own beautiful lake! How do you
welcome your wanderer? Is your beauty a welcome or a
mockery at my unhappiness?"
He was so moved to be back in his beloved, native
country that he wept again. Yet, as he drew nearer home,
grief and fear again overcame him. Night also closed
around, and the picture of the dark mountains appeared
to him a vast and dim scene of evil. He had the feeling
that he was destined to be the most wretched of human
beings.
It was completely dark when Frankenstein arrived at
Geneva. The gates of the town were already shut, and he
had to spend the night at a neighboring village. Being
unable to rest, he decided to visit the spot where William
76 FRANKENSTEIN
had been found. As he went, he saw the lightning begin
to play on the summit of Mont Blanc. A storm ap-
proached rapidly. Frankenstein climbed a hill to watch
the progress of the storm.
It advanced. The rain soon began to fall in large
drops, and the thunder burst with a terrific crash over his
head. Flashes of lightning dazzled his eyes, lit up the
lake until it appeared like a vast sheet of fire, and then
left the world in darkness until it flashed again.
While Frankenstein watched the war in the skies, so
beautiful yet terrifying, he moved on with quick steps.
Then in the gloom, he saw a figure which stole from
behind a clump of trees not far away.
Frankenstein stood still, gazing intently. He could not
be mistaken! A flash of lightning illuminated the figure
and revealed its shape. The gigantic height, the deformity
of its face instantly informed Frankenstein that it was the
hideous monster to whom he had given life.
"What is he doing here?" Frankenstein wondered.
"Could he be-" Frankenstein shuddered, "-the one
who attacked my brother?"
No sooner did that idea cross his imagination than he
became convinced of its truth. His teeth chattered and he
leaned against a tree for support.
The figure passed Frankenstein quickly and was lost in
the darkness. Nothing in human shape could have hurt
that fair child. He was the attacker! Frankenstein could
not doubt it. He thought of chasing the demon, but it
would have been in vain.
THE HORRIBLE TRUTH Vi
78 FRANKENSTEIN
Another flash of lightning showed Frankenstein the
monster clinging to the rocks of a mountainside impossi-
ble for ordinary human beings to climb. The mountain
was situated south of the park, and how the monster
managed to scale its steep side, Frankenstein could not
imagine. The monster soon reached the summit and
disappeared.
Frankenstein remained still. The thunder stopped, but
the rain still continued. All was darkness. The thousand
details Frankenstein had tried to forget concerning the
creation of the monster now churned in his brain-all the
labor beforehand, the moment it had come to life, its es-
cape. Two years had passed since the night the monster
came alive. Was this his first crime? Alas! Had Franken--
stein turned loose into the world a depraved wretch
whose delight was in destruction and misery?
The agony Frankenstein suffered that night cannot be
described. Cold and wet, unable to rest, he wandered
about in the open air. He thought of the evil being he
had cast among mankind, endowed with the will and
power to cause horrible suffering, such as the attack
upon Frankenstein's own brother. The monster seemed
to Frankenstein that night like his own ghostly vampire,
his own spirit let loose from the grave, forced to destroy
all that was dear to him.
"God, what have I done?" he wondered. "For what
am I responsible?" He shivered in his cloak and stared
wildly up at the heavens. For answer, there were only
the torrents of rain pouring down from the skies.
THE HORRIBLE TRUTH 719
Day dawned. Frankenstein bent his steps toward the
town. The gates were open, and he hurried through the
Streets to his father's house. His first thought was to tell
what he knew of the attacker and cause instant chase to
be made. But he paused when he thought about the story
he had to tell.
He had created a being. He had given it life. He had
then met this creature at midnight and seen it climb
among the precipices of a mountain no one could climb.
Who would believe him?
He remembered that everybody knew of his delirium
at the time of the monster's creation, and they would
believe his tale to be simply a nightmare caused by fever.
Would not the story sound like the ravings of insanity?
Besides, even if he could make someone believe him,
what use would there be in chasing the monster? Who
could arrest a creature capable of scaling the overhang-
ing sides of Mont Saléve? No. It was better to keep silent,
Frankenstein reflected, and he made up his mind to say
nothing. j
It was about five o'clock in the morning when he en-
tered the large hall of his father's house. He told the ser-
to wait until they rose. Wearily, Frankenstein threw him-
self into a chair in front of the fire.
It was Ernest who greeted him first. He had heard
Frankenstein arrive and, dressing quickly, hurried
downstairs.
"Welcome, my dearest Victor," he said. "Ah, I wish
80 FRANKENSTEIN
you had come three months ago, and then you would
have found us all joyful. You come now to share our
misery instead. Yet your presence will, I hope, revive our
father and comfort Elizabeth. Poor William, our darling
and our pride. He still suffers and cannot speak."
A mortal agony crept over Frankenstein. To imagine
his family's unhappiness was bad enough. To witness it
was Worse.
"Elizabeth needs comforting most of all," Ernest con-
tinued, "since she still accuses herself of having been the
cause of William's horrible experience. But since the at-
tacker has been discovered-"
"The attacker discovered! Good God! How can that
be? Who could attempt to pursue him? It is impossible.
One might as well try to overtake the winds, or confine a
mountain stream with a straw. I saw him, too. He was
free last night," cried Frankenstein.
"I do not know what you mean," replied Ernest, won-
dering. "But to us, the discovery we have made com-
pletes our misery. No one would believe it at first, and
even now Elizabeth will not be convinced in spite of the
evidence. Indeed, who would believe that Justine, who
was so good, so fond of all the family, could suddenly
become capable of so frightful a crime as to attack a de-
fenseless child?" |
"Justine! Poor, poor girl, is she the accused?" ex-
claimed Frankenstein. "But she is accused wrongfully.
Surely, no one believes she is guilty, Ernest?"
"No one did at first. But several things have come out
THE HORRIBLE TRUTH 81
that have almost forced us to believe her guilty. And her
own behavior has been so confused that it only adds evi-
dence to the facts. But she will be tried in court today,
and you will then hear the whole story,' answered
Ernest.
"Tell me now," pleaded Frankenstein. "I must hear it
now."
fireplace. He placed his hand on Frankenstein's arm and
began to speak.
"On the morning we found William's body, Justine
took sick and was kept in bed for several days. During
this time, one of the servants, happening to examine the
clothing Justine had worn on the night of the attack, dis-
covered in Justine's pocket the jeweled locket with the
picture of our mother in it. The servant, without saying
anything to the family, took the locket to the magistrate.
Justine was arrested immediately and accused of the
attack upon William. The poor girl only confirmed the
suspicion by her extreme confusion of manner."
Frankenstein thought this a strange tale, but it did not
shake his faith in Justine's innocence. "You are mistak-
en," Frankenstein told his brother. "I know the attacker.
Justine, poor, good Justine, is innocent."
At that instant, Frankenstein heard his father's foot-
steps in the hall. When his father entered, they greeted
each other warmly.
"Father," said Ernest. "Victor says that he knows who
attacked William."
82 FRANKENSTEIN
"We do also," replied their father. "Isn't it terrible,
Victor, to discover so much criminality and ingratitude in
a woman we thought so devoted to us?"
"My dear father," exclaimed Frankenstein. "Justine
has done nothing. She's innocent."
"If she is, God forbid that she should suffer as guilty.
She is to be tried today, and I hope, I sincerely hope,
that she will be acquitted."
This speech calmed Frankenstein. He was strongly
convinced in his own mind that neither Justine nor any
other human being was guilty. Thus he had no fear
that any evidence existed strong enough to convict her.
Frankenstein's story of the monster was not one to an-
nounce publicly. Its astounding horror would be looked
upon as madness. To believe his story of the monster,
people would have to see the creature with their own
eyes. If William would speak-but William would not, or
could not, tell of what had happened to him. And with-
out William's evidence to convince everyone, there was
no use in Frankenstein telling his story.
The men were soon joined by Elizabeth. Time had
changed her since Frankenstein had seen her last. It had
endowed her with loveliness even beyond the beauty of
her childish years. She welcomed Frankenstein with the
greatest affection.
"Your being here, Victor, gives me hope," said Eliz-
abeth softly. "You, perhaps, will find some way to help
my poor innocent Justine. I know she is innocent. She
cannot be guilty of such a crime."
THE HORRIBLE TRUTH 83
"She is innocent," Frankenstein reassured her, "and
that much shall be proved. Have no fear."
"Oh, Victor, how glad I am to hear you say so," re-
sponded Elizabeth, as she took his arm. "Everyone else
believes her guilty, and this has made me feel so
helpless."
"Dearest Elizabeth, dry your tears," said Frankenstein.
"It will all come out right. Now take me to see our little
William. How is he today?"
"The doctors hope he will be well in a few months'
time," she answered, as she led Frankenstein up the wide
stairway and along the hall to William's nursery. "But as
yet he is very weak. The poor boy was so terribly fright-
ened, Victor."
Justine's trial began at eleven o'clock that morning. All
of Frankenstein's family were required as witnesses, and
Victor Frankenstein accompanied them to court. During
the whole awful mockery of justice, Frankenstein suffered
living torture. Were two people, first William and now
Justine, to be punished for his curiosity in the realms of
natural science, his unlawful experiments? Was another
life to be ruined and he the cause? A thousand times
would he rather have confessed himself guilty to the
crime of which Justine was accused. But he had been ab-
sent when it happened, and no one would believe such a
confession. He was therefore forced to sit by and watch.
Justine seemed to be calm. She looked so honest, so
pretty, so innocent. But as the trial began, several strange
84 FRANKENSTEIN
facts came out which might have staggered anyone who
did not know, as Frankenstein did, the truth.
The facts were these: A market-woman had seen
Justine, early in the morning, near the spot where Wil-
liam was later found. Justine, it was proved, had been
out all the night before. When the market-woman asked
Justine why she was there, Justine had appeared con-
fused. When Justine had returned to the Frankenstein
house and was asked why she was out all night, she re-
plied that she had been looking for William. Then, when
she was shown William's unconscious form, she became
hysterical and ill. The locket with the picture was then
produced from her clothing.
When the court heard these facts, there was a murmur
of horror and disgust.
Justine was called on for her defense. She had wept
and looked miserable when she was being accused, and
now did her best to explain the facts.
"God knows how entirely innocent I am," she began.
"T can explain all of these facts, if you will listen to me.
That evening, I had been given permission by Miss Eliz-
abeth to visit my aunt in a village just outside Geneva.
On my return, at about nine o'clock, I met a man who
said they were looking for a lost child, little William
Frankenstein. I was alarmed and spent several hours
looking for William myself. I could not find him and
decided to go back to the house. But by then, the gates
of Geneva were shut and I was forced to remain outside.
I found a barn just beyond the Plainpalais Park and
THE HORRIBLE TRUTH 85
slept for several hours. In the morning, I searched again,
but if I came near the spot where William lay, I did not
know it. I recall meeting the market-woman, but if I
seemed confused, perhaps it was because I was worried
and had not had much sleep. That is all I know," ended
Justine. "I understand that it is the locket which most
condemns me, but of that I have no knowledge. I do not
know how it came into my pocket. Perhaps the attacker
placed it there. But I do not know how. And I do not
know why, after he had just stolen it, he should want
to part with it so soon. I understand how fatal this fact
is to my case, but I beg you, do not let it condemn me.
Surely there are witnesses to my good reputation who
will tell you that I could never be guilty of such a terrible
thing."
Among other witnesses, Elizabeth came forward to de-
fend Justine's character, to speak of her devotion and to
insist upon her innocence.
"Besides," ended Elizabeth, "why should Justine have
wanted to steal such a trinket when, because I value her
so much, I would have been delighted to give it to her
for the asking?" .
A murmur of approval followed Elizabeth's simple
and powerful appeal. But the approval was not for
Justine. It was for Elizabeth's loyalty. The public was still
furious at the ingratitude they felt Justine had displayed
by her act.
Frankenstein's anguish was now extreme. Was it possi-
ble that the monster had not only attacked the child but
86 FRANKENSTEIN
had also the malice to leave the locket as evidence on the
person of Justine? Frankenstein's horror mounted, espe-
cially when he saw that the faces of the judges had al-
ready condemned the unhappy victim. Justine's torture
could not equal his own. She knew her own innocence,
but Frankenstein suffered the tortures of remorse.
He passed a hideous night. In the morning, he re-
turned to court. His lips and throat were parched. He
dared not ask the fatal question. The ballots had all been
counted, and he was told the results. Justine was
condemned.
With heart-sickening despair, Frankenstein then heard
that Justine had confessed! What could it mean? Had he
gone mad?
Elizabeth was heartbroken when Frankenstein re-
turned home with the news. She wished immediately to
visit Justine in the prison to which she had been con-
demned for life on a charge of attempted murder and
theft.
They entered the gloomy prison and went down the
dark stairs to the cells below. They saw Justine sitting
on some straw in the back of her cell, her head resting
on her knees. She rose at seeing her visitors and threw
herself at Elizabeth's feet.
"Oh Justine," wept Elizabeth, "why did you rob me of
my belief in your innocence by confessing?"
Justine's voice was suffocated by sobs. "The priest
threatened me that I would go to hell and my soul be
damned forever if I did not confess. I did confess so that
THE HORRIBLE TRUTH 87
the priest would bless me, but that confession was a lie.
It is the lie which now makes me more miserable than all
else. God in heaven forgive me!" She paused, weeping,
and then continued, "Please, sweet lady, do not believe
your Justine capable of a crime only the devil would
commit!"
"Oh Justine, forgive my having doubted you," cried
Elizabeth. "I shall come here and visit you often, and
shall never give up trying to release you."
"Do not worry about me, dear lady," said Justine soft-
ly, her eyes shining. "God is with me now and, as I think
I shall die soon in this place, it will not be long before I
shall be with God. May He bless you all. Remember me,
dear lady, do not forget me."
Thus the poor girl tried to comfort herself. But there
was no consolation for Victor Frankenstein. He felt him-
self guilty of the entire tragedy, and a deep and bitter
agony filled him as he listened to Justine's farewell.
"Goodby, sweet lady, dearest Elizabeth, my beloved
and only friend. May heaven bless and preserve you.
May this be the last misfortune that you will ever suffer.
Live and be happy, and make others so."
The next day Justine died. Frankenstein entered a hell
whose fires nothing could extinguish. From the tortures
of his own heart, he turned to see the deep and voiceless
grief of his Elizabeth. This also was his doing! And his
father's agony over William, this too! All was the work
of his own accursed hands.
Worse, in the deep recesses of his soul, he sensed that
88 FRANKENSTEIN
this was not the end of their sorrow. He, who would give
his life for all of them, he, Frankenstein, who had no joy
except through them, would be the cause of yet more
tears and suffering.
Torn by remorse, horror and despair, he saw those he
loved watching over the bed of William and the grave of
Justine, the first hapless victims of his unhallowed arts.
|| 6 |e-
Face To Face
NOTHING COULD remove the weight of despair and re-
morse which pressed on Frankenstein's heart. Justine was
dead and at rest, but he was alive to suffer. Sleep fled
from his eyes. He wandered about his father's house feel-
ing like an evil spirit who had committed deeds horri-
ble beyond description. How strange to think that he had
begun life with good intentions, that he had thirsted for
knowledge to make himself useful to his fellow-beings.
Now all his youthful hopes were gone, and Frankenstein
spent his days brooding under a dark cloud of guilt and
self-torture. This state of mind nearly ruined his health
again, and made all sounds of joy a mockery. Solitude
was his only consolation-deep, dark, deathlike solitude.
"You must not sorrow so deeply," said his father.
"Too much grief prevents one not only from all enjoy-
ment, but even from daily usefulness, without which no
man is fit for society."
90 FRANKENSTEIN
Yet his father's words came from a serene and guiltless
mind. Such was not Frankenstein's case, and he could
only feel despair and hide himself as much as possible
from his father's view.
As it was June and the beginning of summer, the fami-
ly soon left Geneva for their country home at Belrive.
This change was especially welcome to Frankenstein.
The shutting of the gates regularly at ten o'clock, and the
impossibility of staying out on the lake after that hour,
had made living within the walls of Geneva very uncom-
fortable for him. Now he was free, out in the country, to
seek the solitude he so much needed.
Often, after the rest of the family had gone to bed,
Frankenstein took a boat out on Lake Geneva, and with
the sails set, let the wind carry him out to the middle of
the dark waters. There he was alone with his miserable
reflections. Often he was tempted, when all was at peace
around him and he the only unquiet thing that wandered
restless, to plunge into the silent lake and let the waters
close over him and his calamities forever. But then he
thought of Elizabeth, whom he loved, and his father and
brothers. He could not leave them unprotected and ex-
posed to the malice of the fiend whom he had let loose
among them.
This was what tortured Frankenstein most. He lived in
daily fear that the monster whom he had created would
attack again and again,.as long as anything Frankenstein
loved remained alive.
Frankenstein's hatred of this fiend cannot be de-
FACE TO FACE 9]
scribed. When he thought of the monster, he gnashed his
teeth, his eyes became inflamed, and he wished nothing
so much as to see the monster again in order to avenge
the attack on William and the death of Justine.
When he saw Elizabeth bending in care over little Wil-
liam's bed or listened to her mourning the death of
Justine, Frankenstein suffered the most agony. It made
him feel, though he had not actually committed any
crime, as though he had.
Neither his father's concern nor Elizabeth's love could
help him. Less and less often was he able to find peace.
Finally, one day, his whirlwind passions drove him to
seek relief in bodily exercise and a change of scene. He
hired a horse and rode toward the near Alpine valleys
and sought, in the magnificence and the eternity of such
scenes, to forget himself and his sorrows.
He decided to travel to the valley of Chamonix, high
in the French Alps. It was August, and the weather was
lovely as Frankenstein rode up the ravine of the Arve
River. The weight upon his spirit lightened as he went
higher into the ravine. The immense mountains and cliffs
hung over him on every side, and the sound of the river
raged among the rocks. Still he made his horse climb high-
er, and the ravine grew more magnificent than before.
Ruined castles hung on the steep precipices of the moun-
tains, and behind these mountains were the mighty Alps.
Their white and shining peaks towered above all, as if
they belonged to another earth and were the home of an-
other race of beings. ~
we
92 FRANKENSTEIN
Frankenstein crossed the ravine over the bridge of
Pélissier and began to climb the mountain which over-
hung the ravine. Soon after, he entered the valley of
Chamonix. Here were no more ruined castles, but only
the high and snowy mountains. Immense glaciers ap-
proached the road, and he heard the rumbling thunder
of a falling avalanche. Glorious and supreme, Mont
Blanc raised its domed peak majestically over all.
A tingling, long-lost sense of pleasure came to Fran-
kenstein as he rode toward the village of Chamonix. In
his room at the inn, he remained at the window long into
the night, watching the lightning play above Mont Blanc
and listening to the rushing of the Arve River as it pur-
sued its noisy way beneath. At length the sound soothed
him, and sleep came at last.
For a day, Frankenstein rested and roamed about the
valley at the foot of the glacier. The steep sides of vast
mountains were before him, and the solemn silence was
broken only by the thunderous sounds of an avalanche
or the cracking of the ice echoing among the mountains.
The silence and beauty did not remove his grief, but at
least they quieted it and gave him some measure of
peace. |
In the morning, it was raining and thick mists hid the
summits of the mountains. Despite this, Frankenstein
decided to climb the summit of Montanvert to view the
tremendous and ever-moving glacier. He wished to go
alone, without a guide, as the presence of someone else
would destroy the solitary grandeur of the scene.
FACE TO FACE' 93
It was a steep and dangerous climb, and it was nearly
noon when Frankenstein arrived at the top. For some
time, he sat upon a rock overlooking the sea of ice. Vast
mists rose and curled in wreaths about the opposite
mountains and drifted across the glacier. After Franken-
stein had rested, he went down onto the ice. The surface
was very uneven, rising like the waves of a troubled sea.
The field of ice was wide, and he spent nearly two hours
in crossing it. The opposite mountain was a bare, perpen-
dicular rock. When he reached it, Frankenstein could see
Montanvert exactly across from him at a distance of
three miles. He remained in a crevice of the rock and
gazed at the river of ice as it wound among the moun-
tains whose icy and glittering peaks shone in the sunlight
over the clouds.
"How marvelous!" Frankenstein cried aloud, and as
he did, he suddenly saw a figure, at some distance, ad-
vancing toward him with superhuman speed. It bounded
over the crevices in the ice, among which Frankenstein
had walked with caution. Its stature also, as it ap-
proached, seemed to Frankenstein larger than that of a
man. Frankenstein was troubled. A mist came over his
eyes, and he felt a faintness seize him. But the cold air of
the mountains restored him, and he looked again.
It was the monster, the wretch whom he had created!
The horrible and loathsome sight made Frankenstein
tremble with rage. Standing against the rock, Franken-
stein resolved to wait until the monster came near and
then to kill him.
94 FRANKENSTEIN
The mists parted. The monster came closer. His face
spoke bitter anguish, combined with scorn and malice.
Its unearthly ugliness made it almost too horrible for
human eyes. Under the long cloak, the monster's ragged
clothes bared the scarred, wrinkled skin of his throat,
forearms, and the huge, dangling wrists and hands.
"Devil!" screamed Frankenstein in raging fury. "How
dare you come near me! Are you not afraid of the ven-
geance I will take upon your miserable head? Begone,
vile monster! Or rather, stay, that I may trample you to
dust. If only, by killing you, I could bring the victim you
attacked back to health and the victim you murdered
back to life!"
The monster swayed before Frankenstein, the watery
eyes fixed on his creator and the black lips curled with
defiance.
"I expected this sort of welcome," said the demon."All
men hate the wretched. How then must I be hated, who
am miserable beyond all living things! Yet you, my cre-
ator, detest and turn me away. I am your creature. We are
bound by ties which can only be broken by the death of
one of us. Your purpose is to kill me? How dare you
play with life in this way? Do your duty toward me, and
I will do mine toward you and the rest of mankind. If
you will agree to my conditions, I will leave them and
you in peace. But if you refuse, I will feed the jaws of
death until it is filled with the blood of your remaining
friends." ; |
"Abhorred monster!" cried Frankenstein. "Fiend that
FACE TO FACE 95
you are! The tortures of hell are too small a vengeance
for your crimes. Wretched devil! You blame me for
your creation. Come on then, that I may extinguish the
spark of life which I so carelessly bestowed."
Frankenstein's rage was beyond control. He sprang on
the monster with all his strength.
The monster easily threw him off and said, "Be calm! I
beg you to hear me before you let loose your hatred.
Have I not suffered enough that you wish to add to my
misery? Life, though hard, is dear to me and I will de-
fend myself. Remember, before you attack me, that you
made me more powerful than yourself. I am greater in
height and strength than you. But I have no wish to set
myself against you. I am your creature. You are my lord
and king and I will obey you, if only you will do your
part and give me what you owe me. Oh, Frankenstein,
why are you fair to other beings and trample only me?
You ought to give justice, mercy, and affection to me
most of all. Remember that I am your creature. I ought
to be your Adam, but instead I am the fallen angel
whom you drive from joy. Everywhere on earth I see
happiness, which I alone am forbidden. At first I was
kindly and good. Misery made me a fiend. Make me
happy, and I shall again be virtuous."
But Frankenstein stood firmly on the ice, and raising
his arm, pointed his finger toward the distance.
"Begone!" he cried. "I will not hear you. There can be
no talk between us. We are enemies. Go! Or let us try
our strength in a fight in which one of us must die!"
96 FRANKENSTEIN
But the monster did not move, and continued to plead
with Frankenstein. As the wrinkled, black lips formed
words, every muscle in the monster's face twitched visi-
bly under the thin, yellow skin.
"How can I make you understand?" the monster cried
hoarsely. "Is there no way I can beg for your mercy, no
way to implore your goodness and compassion? Believe
me, Frankenstein. I was kind. My soul glowed with love
and humanity in the first months of my life. But am I not
alone, miserably alone? You, my creator, hate me. What
hope can I gather from your fellow-men who owe me
nothing? They kick me away, stone me, hate me."
The monster broke off to gesture toward the white and
empty scene. "The lonely mountains and dreary glaciers
are my refuge. I have wandered here many days. The
caves of ice, which I alone do not fear, are home to me,
the only home which man will allow me. These bleak
skies are my comfort, for they are kinder to me than
your fellow men. If the rest of mankind knew of my exis-
tence, they would do as you do and arm themselves to
destroy me. Shall I not then hate them who hate me? I
will not make peace with my enemies. I am miserable,
and they shall share my wretchedness."
Now the monster bent closer toward Frankenstein.
"Yet it is in your power to make it up to me and to de-
liver mankind from my anger, which will soon grow into
so great an evil that not only you and your family, but
thousands of others, shall be swallowed up in the whirl-
winds of its rage. Let me make you understand and do not
FACE TO FACE 97
scorn me. Listen to my tale of what has happened to me.
Afterward, abandon me or feel sorry for me as you think
I deserve. But hear me. Even by human laws, the guilty
are allowed to defend themselves before they are con-
demned. Listen to me, Frankenstein. You accuse me of
murder, and yet you would murder me. But I do not ask
you to spare me, only to listen. Then, if you can and if
you will, destroy the work of your hands."
Frankenstein shuddered. "Why do you make me re-
member that I made you, that I am the cause of so much
evil? Cursed be the day, abhorred devil, when you first
saw light! Cursed be the hands that formed you! You
have made me so miserable that I have no power to con-
sider whether I am fair to you or not. Go away! Take
from me the sight of your detested form."
The monster raised a huge, hideous hand-not to
strike, but to place it across Frankenstein's eyes. "Now
you cannot see me," said the monster. "But still you can
listen to me and grant me your mercy. By the virtues that
I once possessed, I demand this from you. Hear my tale.
It is long and strange."
Frankenstein flung the monster's hand away in vio-
lence and was again seized by a fit of shuddering.
"You are cold," said the monster. "You cannot bear
this temperature as well as I. Come to my hut upon the
mountain. The sun is still high in the heavens. Before it
sets beyond the snowy peaks, you will have heard my
story and can decide. It will then rest on you whether I
leave mankind forever and lead a harmless life or become
98 FRANKENSTEIN
a force of evil to terrify you and your fellow-beings."
As the monster spoke, he led the way across the ice.
Frankenstein followed, partly from curiosity and partly
because he had begun to be impressed by the monster's
arguments. For the first time, Frankenstein considered
the duties of a creator toward his creature, and that he
ought to make his creature happy before he complained
of the creature's wickedness.
He went with his monster, therefore, across the ice and
they climbed the opposite rock. The air was cold, and it
started to rain again. The monster climbed quickly and
waited for Frankenstein at the door of the hut with a
look of triumph. With a heavy heart, Frankenstein
passed before the monster and entered the wooden hut.
The monster lighted the fire, and Frankenstein sat near it
with his odious companion to listen to the monster's tale.
As he listened, Frankenstein was moved to pity the
poor monster. When he spoke of the early days of his
life, his confused memory of only the hurtful light and
the chilling cold until his arrival in the forest of Ingol-
stadt, Frankenstein's anger fled. Then the monster went
on to tell his creator of his loneliness and his fear, the
gradual discovery of his senses, and the hunger for food
that drove him from the forest. The monster's voice
broke in anguish as he told Frankenstein of the old man
who had run from him, the villagers who stoned him,
and of his arrival at the cottagers' hovel.
"There I discovered greater hungers than that for
food," said the monster. "I discovered the hunger of the
FACE TO FACE' 99
mind for /knowledge and the heart for love. The first
hunger, I was able to satisfy in part. I learned to speak,
to read, and to write."
As the monster recounted the whole of his experience
with the cottagers, Frankenstein could not help being
struck by the creature's great intelligence. Imprisoned in
the hideous head was a sensitive and capable intellect.
How quickly he had learned!
"But I learned also to love," the monster went on,
"and learned to need affection. I cannot describe to you
the torments I felt on discovering my loathsome appear-
ance and, from the notes in my pocket which you had
written, the disgusting details of my creation. Love and
affection? Who in all the world could give me these! But
still I hoped," said the monster bitterly. "Still my heart
was gentle enough to hope that those kindly people who
lived in the cottage would not turn me away."
As the monster went on to describe the agony of his
final experiences with the cottagers, tears of bitterness
and loss fell from his eyes.
"Afterwards, cursing you, yet needing you, I traveled
to Geneva," said the monster. He told Frankenstein how
he had saved the life of the little girl who had fallen into
the river, and how he had been shot and wounded in
return.
Then the monster spoke of William and how the child
had struggled, hurling words at him too terrible to bear.
"T grasped his throat to silence him, and in a moment
he lay at my feet," said the monster. "It was an accident.
FRANKENSTEIN 100
FACE TO FACE 101
I did not mean to hurt the child. But as I gazed at him, I
felt triumphant in knowing that this act would bring you
pain, that I, too, could torment as I had been tormented.
Then as I fixed my eyes upon the child, I saw the locket,
and taking it, examined the picture inside. The loveliness
of the woman in the picture only reminded me once
more of my own ugly form and the loneliness to which I
was condemned. I left William then, and hid myself in a
barn. There was a woman inside sleeping on some straw.
She was young and beautiful. Here, I thought, is one of
those whose heavenly smiles are given to all but me. And
then I bent over her and whispered, 'Awake fair lady,
your lover is near-he who would give his life for one
look of affection.'
"The sleeper stirred. A thrill of terror ran through me.
What if she should really wake and see me and curse me
and call me murderer? I did not know if William were
alive or dead. The thought that she might waken and tell
of my crime against William maddened me. Not I, I de-
cided, but she shall suffer. The murder I may have com-
mitted she shall pay for because I am kept from all that
she could give me. Having learned from Felix how your
human law works, I knew that she would be punished. I
bent over her and placed the picture in her pocket. She
moved again, and I fled.
"For some days I haunted the spot where these things
had taken place. Sometimes I wished to see you and
sometimes wished to kill myself and be rid of my mis-
eries. At last, | wandered toward these mountains and have
102 FRANKENSTEIN
remained here since, burning with a passion which you
alone can satisfy."
The monster rose from his seat and lunged toward
Frankenstein to grasp his shoulders.
"We will not part," the monster said, "I will not let
you leave until you agree to my conditions. I am alone
and miserable. Mankind refuses me its company. But if
there were someone as deformed and horrible as myself,
she would be my friend. My companion must be the
same as I and have the same defects. Frankenstein, you
must create this being."
The monster finished speaking and fixed his look upon
Frankenstein in expectation of a reply. But Frankenstein
was still too shocked by the monster's request to answer,
so the monster repeated, "You must create a female for
me. I want a wife, a friend, to live with. Only you can do
this, and I demand it of you as a right which you must
not refuse."
The pity with which Frankenstein had listened to the
first part of the monster's tale had vanished at its ending.
Rage burned within him again.
"I do refuse," Frankenstein replied. "No torture shall
make me create another like yourself. Two such evil
creatures as you might destroy the world! You may tor-
ture me, but I will never consent."
"You are in the wrong," replied the fiend, returning
heavily to his seat. "But instead of threatening you, I will
reason with you. I am malicious because I am miserable.
Am I not shunned and hated by all men? You, my cre-
FACE TO FACE 103
ator, would tear me to pieces if you could. Remember
that, and tell me why I should pity man more than he
pities me. If any man were kind to me, for that per-
son's sake I would make peace with all men. But humans
cannot help but hate me, and as I am proud, I will not
simply accept this fate. I will revenge my injuries. If I
- cannot inspire love, I will cause fear-especially toward
you, my arch-enemy-because you created me and are
responsible for my unhappiness. I will work at your de-
struction until I break your heart and make you curse the
hour of your birth!"
As he spoke, a fiendish rage wrinkled his face into con-
tortions too horrible for human eyes to behold, but he
calmed himself and continued.
"I intended to reason, not to grow angry. It is you who
are the cause. I did not ask to be created. You created
me and you must help me now. Since neither you nor
any of your fellow-beings will be my friend, what I ask
of you is surely reasonable and not so much to ask. I want a
female creature as hideous as myself. It is not much, but it
will make me content. It is true we shall be monsters, cut off
from all the world. But that will only make us love each
other more. Our lives will not be happy, but they will
be harmless and free of the misery I feel. My creator,
make me happy! Let me feel gratitude toward you for one
kindly act. Let me see that one man at least feels sympathy
for me. Do not deny me my request!" the monster pleaded.
Frankenstein was moved. He shuddered when he
thought of the possible results of his consent, but he felt
104 FRANKENSTEIN
that there was some justice in the monster's argument.
His tale, and the feelings he now expressed, proved him
to be a creature of sensitivity. Did Frankenstein not owe
his monster whatever happiness was in his power to give?
The monster saw Frankenstein's change of feeling, and
continued, "If you consent, neither you nor any other
human being shall ever see us again. I will go to the vast
wilds of South America. My food is not that of man. I do
not kill living creatures to satisfy my appetite. Acorns
and berries are enough for me. My companion will be of
the same nature as myself. We shall make our bed of
dried leaves. The sun will shine on us as on men. The
picture I present to you is peaceful and human, and you
must feel that you could deny me only out of cruelty.
Pitiless as you were before, I now see compassion in your
eyes. Let me beg you to give me what I want so much."
"You say that you will leave the places where mankind
lives," replied Frankenstein, "to dwell in those wilds
where the beasts will be your only companions. How can
you, who long for the love and sympathy of man, keep
your promise? You will return, and again seek their
kindness and be hated. Your evil passions will return,
and then there will be two of you to destroy us. I cannot
do this. I cannot consent."
The monster lifted his scarred and hideous hands.
"How changeable your feelings are! A moment ago you
were ready to agree. Why do you once again harden
your heart against me? I swear to you that, with my com-
panion, I will quit the neighborhood of man and dwell in
FACE TO FACE 105
the most savage of places. My evil passions will have
vanished, if I have a friend, for she will give me sympa-
thy. My life will pass quietly, and in my dying moments,
I shall not curse my maker."
His words had a strange effect upon Frankenstein. He
pitied the monster and felt a wish to make him happy.
But when Frankenstein gazed on the monster, when he
saw the filthy mass that moved and talked, his heart
sickened with horror and hatred. The monster was right.
If even his creator could not bear the sight of him, no
one could. This being so, Frankenstein felt he had no
right to deny the monster the one sort of creature who
would keep him company, a hideous living corpse like
himself.
"You swear," Frankenstein said finally, "to be harm-
less. But have you not already done enough evil to make
me distrust you? Perhaps your wanting a companion is a
trick so that you may have help in your destruction and
revenge."
"Stop playing with me," groaned the monster. "I de-
mand an answer. I have already explained that it is my
loneliness which makes me evil. With someone at my
side, I shall no longer be alone and shall feel no more of
that anger which makes me vengeful. I need only affec-
tion, Frankenstein, to make me good."
Frankenstein paused for some time to think, to consid-
er the monster's argument. He thought of the monster's
early virtues, and the loathing and scorn which had
changed virtue to evil. The monster's power and threats
106 FRANKENSTEIN
he also considered. A creature who could exist in ice-
caves and climb impossible cliffs was a being no human
could cope with. The monster was a thing to be feared.
Turning to the monster, therefore, Frankenstein re-
plied, "I consent to your demand if you will really swear
to leave Europe forever, and every other place where
mankind lives, when I give you a female to accompany
you in your exile."
"T swear," cried the monster, "by the sun, and by the
blue sky of heaven, and by the fire of love that burns my
heart, that if you grant my prayer you shall never behold
me again. Go to your home and begin your labors. I
shall watch over you from afar, but do not be afraid. I
will wait until you are ready and then I shall appear."
Saying this, the monster suddenly left the hut, fearful,
perhaps, that Frankenstein might change his mind.
Going to the door, Frankenstein watched the monster go
down the mountain with greater speed than the flight of
an eagle. Soon he was lost from view in the mists which
hovered over the sea of ice.
The monster's tale had taken the whole day to tell.
The sun was on the edge of the horizon when he left.
Frankenstein knew that he ought to hurry down to the
valley before darkness, but his heart was heavy and his
steps slow. The difficulty of finding firm footing on the
steep and twisting paths made his descent even slower,
and night came upon him half way down. He sat on a
rock to rest, and watched the clouds pass over the stars.
In the strange, silent night his thoughts stirred wildly.
FACE TO FACE 107
"Oh, stars and clouds and winds," he cried out, "you
mock me! If you really pity me, crush me now into
nothing and put an end to the terrible agony which
hangs over my life."
But for answer, there was only silence.
It was morning when Frankenstein reached the village
of Chamonix. He took no rest, but returned immediately
to Geneva. As soon as he entered his father's house, he
presented himself to the family. They were alarmed at
Frankenstein's haggard and wild appearance, but though
they questioned him, he made no answer. He felt shut
out from their love, from all sympathy, by the horrible
task he had to perform. Though he must do it to save
them, he felt too loathsome to be in their company. With
an agonized look, he left them to shut himself alone in
his room.
"oJ 7 |e-
The Monster's Wife
THE MONSTER had been alive for nearly two years now.
Days and weeks passed after Dr. Frankenstein's return
from Chamonix, and he could not get the thought of the
monster or the promise he had made to him out of his
mind. Still Dr. Frankenstein did not have the courage to
begin his work. He feared the fiend's revenge, but he
could not overcome his loathing for the task he had to
perform.
Frankenstein knew that in order to create a wife for
the monster, he would have to study again, and to reread
many books as well as his own notes. He had heard of
some discoveries made by an English philosopher which
he thought might be helpful, and he often thought of vis-
iting England to increase his knowledge. But he kept put--
ting the trip off, inventing every excuse he could think of
to delay the start of his work. He even began to convince
himself that maybe it was not necessary to start to work
so quickly.
THE MONSTER'S WIFE 109
Then one day, Frankenstein's father called him into
"T am glad to see your health improving, my son," said
Frankenstein's father. "But you avoid your family and
still you seem to be unhappy. For a long time I have
wondered why, but now I have an idea."
Frankenstein gave his father a startled look and turned
pale.
But his father continued, "You are unhappy because
of Elizabeth, aren't you? You know that I have long
wished for you and Elizabeth to marry. You grew up to-
gether, studied together, and have always appeared suit-
ed to one another. But perhaps you love her only as a
sister. Perhaps you are in love with someone else. And I
have wondered if the thought of disappointing my hopes
for your marriage or hurting Elizabeth's feelings is the
cause of your unhappiness."
Frankenstein leaned against the fireplace mantle and
smiled at his father in relief. His secret was still safe and
he could, at least, make his father happy on the subject
of Elizabeth.
"My dear father," Frankenstein said. "I love Elizabeth
deeply and tenderly. She is the only woman I have ever
wanted to be my wife. Thinking that I should one day
marry Elizabeth has been my greatest joy. I cannot imag-
ine life without her."
Frankenstein's father glowed with pleasure:
"You've made me very happy," he said softly. "I know
this house has been filled with gloom for these past
110 FRANKENSTEIN
months, and perhaps that is what makes you gloomy,
too. But William is so much better now, and though we
can never forget Justine, we must do what we can to
create happiness in this house once more. Do you see
any reason why you and Elizabeth should not be married
immediately? You are young, but as you have your own
fortune, | cannot imagine that an early marriage would
interfere with any future plans you may have. Don't
think I want to tell you what to do, Victor. I only wish to
hear, if you will confide in me, how you feel about
marrying Elizabeth right away."
Frankenstein listened to his father in silence, and for a
long time was unable to reply. So many thoughts came
rapidly to his mind. Alas! To Frankenstein, the idea of
marrying Elizabeth immediately was one of horror and
dismay. He was bound by a solemn promise, which he
had not yet fulfilled, and dared not break-lest his family
be stricken with terror! How could he go through the
gaieties of a wedding with this deadly weight hanging
around his neck? He must perform his task and let the
monster depart with his mate before he allowed himself
the pleasure of marrying Elizabeth.
Frankenstein remembered that he needed the Eng-
lish professor's knowledge and discoveries for his work.
He could write letters for the information he needed, but
that would be a long and difficult process. It would be
easier and more satisfactory to make the journey to En-
gland. Besides, Frankenstein could not bear the idea of
doing his loathsome work in his father's house. He knew
THE MONSTER'S WIFE 111
that a thousand fearful accidents might happen which
would disclose his horrifying creation. He also knew that
he would often lose all self-control and be unable to hide
the frightful sensations which overcame him during such
hideous tasks. He must leave the people he loved while
he did this work. It would not take long. Finishing it
would bring peace and happiness. With the promise ful-
filled, the monster would depart forever. Or (and this
Frankenstein never stopped hoping for) some accident
might destroy the monster and put an end to Franken-
stein's slavery.
These feelings made him reply to his father, "I would
like first to journey to England. After that, Elizabeth and
I will be married." Concealing the true reason, Franken-
stein gave several excuses for this journey, and his father
was content. After such a long period of melancholy, his
father thought a pleasure trip might do the young man
good.
"Go then," said his father. "Stay a few months, even a
year, and then come back to us happy and refreshed."
There was only one precaution his father and Eliz-
abeth took about Frankenstein's journey. As they were
still worried about his health and his dark moods, they
wanted Frankenstein to have a companion. They wrote
to Henry Clerval. Clerval agreed to join Frankenstein at
Strasburgh.
To England, therefore, Frankenstein was bound. As he
made arrangements for his journey, one feeling haunted
him and made him afraid. During his absence, he would
LA2 FRANKENSTEIN
be leaving his family unaware of the existence of their
enemy and unprotected from his attacks. Yet had the
monster not promised to follow Frankenstein wherever
he went? Might not the fiend accompany him to En-
gland, force his presence on Frankenstein now and then to
remind him of his promise and to watch over its progress?
As awful as this idea was, at least it would mean the
safety of his family, and Frankenstein hoped it might be
so. Frankenstein's other concern was Clerval. He needed
solitude for his work. But for the first part of the journey,
at least, it would be good to have Henry's company.
Clerval's presence might even keep the monster at a
distance, as well as Frankenstein's own maddening
thoughts.
Late in September Frankenstein again left his native
country. Elizabeth bid him a tearful farewell as Franken-
stein entered into the carriage that was to take him away.
It was bitter to him to leave, and bitterer still that he
should have to pack up once again the chemical instru-
ments he now detested. Filled with dreary imaginings, he
rode through beautiful and majestic scenes, seeing noth-
ing and thinking only of the terrible purpose of his trip.
After traveling some days, he arrived at Strasburgh
and waited for Henry Clerval. At last his friend arrived.
"What a difference there is between us!" thought
Frankenstein as he greeted his companion. "Henry is
alive to the beauty of the world, while I am a miserable
wretch, haunted by a curse that shuts off every path to
enjoyment."
THE MONSTER'S WIFE 113
The friends traveled by boat down the Rhine River to
Rotterdam. It was a lovely voyage, and even Franken-
stein took pleasure at the sight of the beautiful ruined
castles set on tremendous cliffs, overlooking the dark
Rhine. From Rotterdam, they proceeded by sea to
England. It was on a clear morning, toward the end
of December, that Frankenstein first saw the white cliffs
of Britain, and, soon after, the steeples of London, with
St. Paul's Cathedral towering above all.
The two men determined to spend several months in
London, Clerval to enjoy himself and further his project
to visit India, and Frankenstein, to seek the information
necessary for his work. He spent long days and nights
discussing various branches of science with England's
greatest natural philosophers. He had, besides, the most
unpleasant task of all-to collect the materials for his new
creation. Again he experienced the horror of gathering
bones from charnel houses, disturbing the dead in their
graves, choosing the necessary organs from dissecting
rooms, and penetrating again the secrets of the human
frame. It tortured Frankenstein to think for what purpose
he packed so carefully all the parts of what was to be-
come his second living corpse.
In March, Frankenstein and Clerval left London to
visit some friends at Perth in Scotland. To please Clerval,
they made the journey slowly in order to view the lovely
countryside and historical places of England. But as the
journey came to an end, Frankenstein was not sorry. He
had now neglected his promise for a long time, and he
114 FRANKENSTEIN
feared the results of the demon's disappointment. The
demon might have, after all, remained in Switzerland
and even now be taking his revenge on Frankenstein's
family. Frankenstein waited for their letters with feverish
impatience. He was also worried about Henry. If the
fiend had followed them, might he not take out his anger
in attacking Henry?
Suddenly Frankenstein did not dare put off his work
any longer. When they arrived in Perth, Frankenstein
said,
"Henry, do not ask me why, I beg you, but I must be
alone for a short time. You stay here with our friends,
while I go north through Scotland by myself. I may be
gone a month or two, but promise not to follow me or
try to stop me. Leave me in peace and solitude for a little
while, and when I return, I hope it will be with a lighter
heart and a happy mood to match your own."
"Only write to me and let me know that you are all
right and I will do as you ask," replied Henry. "Please
don't be gone too long, my friend. I shall miss you."
Having parted from Henry, Frankenstein determined
to go to the loneliest spot he could find in Scotland and
finish his work in solitude. He was certain, suddenly, that
the monster had followed him and would appear when
the work was finished to receive his companion.
Frankenstein packed his instruments and the crates
with their hideous contents and crossed the northern
highlands. He had decided on one of the Orkney islands,
five miles off shore, as the scene of his labors. It was a
THE MONSTER'S WIFE 115
place fitted for such a work, being hardly more than a
rock, whose high sides were continually beaten by the
waves. The barren soil scarcely supported the five per-
sons who lived on the island, and in the whole place
there were only three huts. One of these was empty when
Frankenstein arrived, and he arranged to rent it.
The hut had only two rooms. It was dirty. Part of the
roof had fallen in, the walls were unplastered, and the
door was off its hinges. Frankenstein ordered the hut to
be repaired, bought some furniture and food-all of
which had to be sent for from the mainland. So poor
were the islanders that they asked no questions. They re-
ceived the food and clothes Frankenstein gave them and
left him alone. He lived, therefore, ungazed at and un-
molested while he began his work.
At first, he worked only in the morning. In the after-
noon, he walked on the stony beach of the sea, to listen
to the waves as they roared and dashed at his feet. It was
a monotonous, desolate and depressing scene.
After he had been on the island some time, however,
his routine changed. As he proceeded in his work, it
became every day more horrible to him. Sometimes he
could not make himself enter his laboratory for several
days in a row. At other times, he toiled day and night in
order to complete the work. It was, indeed, a filthy proc-
ess in which he was engaged.
During his first experiment, nearly three years before,
a kind of enthusiastic frenzy had blinded him to the hor-
ror of what he was doing. But this time, he went to it in
116 FRANKENSTEIN
cold blood, and his heart often sickened at the work of
his hands.
All alone, employed in the most detestable occupation,
his nerves grew strained. Every moment he feared to
meet his persecutor. Sometimes, he sat with his eyes fixed
on the ground, terrified that if he raised them, his glance
would meet with the thing he dreaded most to see. But
he worked on, and as his creation began to take shape,
he began to feel hope. Yet even his hope was mixed with
strange forebodings of evil that made him sick inside.
One evening, Frankenstein was in his laboratory. The
sun had set and the moon was just rising above the sea.
He paused for a while to decide whether he should leave
his labor or work through the night. to bring it closer to
the end. As he sat, his thoughts were in a turmoil.
"What am I doing?" he asked himself for the thou-
sandth time. "Three years ago I created a fiend whose
cruelty has ruined my life and filled my heart with the bit-
terest remorse. And now I am about to complete another
being whose spirit I know nothing about."
Frankenstein gazed at the huge form stretched before
him on the table. It was a creature equally as hideous as
the first. It had the same yellow skin which, though it cov-
ered the muscles and arteries beneath, was nevertheless
wrinkled. It had the same black, flowing hair, though
longer and curled. There were the same large white
teeth, the watery eyes, and the straight black lips. The
only difference was in the form of the body, which was
female instead of male.
THE MONSTER'S WIFE 117
"But is that the only difference?" cried Frankenstein in
an agony of despair. "My God! She might become ten
thousand times more evil than her mate, and delight, for
its own sake, in murder and destruction. He has sworn to
leave the neighborhood of man and hide himself in
deserts. But she has not. And she, who in all probability,
will become a thinking, a reasoning creature, might refuse
to agree to a promise made before her creation."
Frankenstein gazed again at his new creation and
shuddered at its ugliness.
"They might even hate each other," he thought. "The
monster who lives now already loathes his deformity.
Might he not detest such ugliness even more when it
comes before his eyes in female form? She might also
turn in disgust from him to the superior beauty of man.
She might leave him. Then he would again be alone and
deserted, even angrier than before at being left by one of
his own kind."
Frankenstein trembled with despair as he then thought
about the worst possibility of all.
"Suppose they do leave Europe together and go to the
other side of the world. Suppose the opposite feelings
occur and they like each other. Great heaven! They would
then want children, and a race of devils would be born
upon the earth to threaten the very existence of man-
kind. Do I have the right, in saving my own family, to
inflict this curse upon the human race?"
Frankenstein had once been moved by the monster's
arguments. He had been struck senseless by the mon-
118 FRANKENSTEIN
ster's fiendish threats to his family. But now, for the first
time, the wickedness of his promise burst upon him. He
shuddered to think that future ages might curse him,
whose selfishness had not hesitated to buy its own peace
at the price, perhaps, of the existence of the entire
human race.
Frankenstein shook and his heart nearly stopped
when, suddenly, as he looked up, he saw, by the light of
the moon, the monster at the window. A ghastly grin
wrinkled his lips as he gazed on Frankenstein and then
on the form stretched upon the laboratory table. He
clasped his hands and his mouth opened as if he were
laughing. .
Yes, he had followed Frankenstein in his travels. He
had moved through forests, hid himself in caves, and
taken refuge in wild, deserted heaths.
"Now," realized Frankenstein, "he has come to mark
my progress and claim the fulfillment of my promise."
As Frankenstein looked at the monster, it seemed to
him that the monster's face expressed malice and treach-
ery. Frankenstein thought, with a sensation of mad-
ness, how he had promised to create another just the
same. He gazed once more in horror at the monster's face
pressed against the glass and strode to his work table.
Trembling with passion, Frankenstein tore to. pieces
the thing he had created. Frankenstein knew that he was
watched as he destroyed the creature upon whom the
monster had built his hopes for happiness, and he heard
the wretch howl in devilish despair and revenge.
THE MONSTER'S WIFE 119
120 FRANKENSTEIN
Frankenstein left the laboratory and, locking the door,
made a solemn vow never to begin such work again.
Then, with trembling steps, he went into the next room.
He was alone. None were near him to cheer his gloom or
comfort his sickening depression and terrible thoughts.
Several hours passed. Frankenstein stood at his window
gazing on the sea. It was almost motionless, for the winds
were hushed, and all nature slept under the eye of the
quiet moon. Only a few fishing vessels specked the water,
and now and then the breeze carried the sound of voices,
as the fishermen called to one another. All was absolute-
ly silent until he suddenly heard the sound of paddling
oars near the shore and someone landing close to the
house.
A moment later, the door creaked. Frankenstein tried
to call for help, but he was overcome by the sensation of
helplessness so often felt in frightful dreams when one
cannot fly from danger and remains rooted to the spot.
The door opened, and the wretch appeared.
"You have destroyed the work which you began," he
said hoarsely. "Why?-Do you dare to break your promise?
I have endured misery. I left Switzerland with you. I
crept along the shores of the Rhine. I have dwelt many
months in the forests of England and in the heaths of
Scotland. I have been tired and cold and hungry. Do you
dare destroy An) hopes?"
"Go away," shouted Frankenstein. "Never will I create
another like yourself. Never will I make another as
deformed and wicked as you."
THE MONSTER'S WIFE 12]
"Slave!" spoke the monster. "Before, I reasoned with
you. I will not reason again! Remember how powerful I
am. You think you are miserable now, but I can make
you so miserable that even the light of day will be hate-
ful to you. You are my creator, but I am your master.
Obey!"
"Never!" Frankenstein cried. "No matter how great
your power is, no threats will ever make me create a
companion in evil for you. I cannot loose another demon
upon the earth. Go! I will never change my mind."
The monster saw Frankenstein's determination and
gnashed his teeth in rage. "Shall each man," he cried,
"have a wife and I be alone? I once had feelings of affec-
tion, but no more. From now on, your hours will pass in
dread and misery, and soon the thing will happen to take
your happiness away from you forever. Are you to be
happy while I grovel in my wretchedness? You can blast
my other passions, but revenge remains. I may die. But
first you, my tyrant and tormentor, shall curse the sun
that gazes on your misery. Beware! For I am fearless,
and therefore powerful. You will repent of your cruelty,
Frankenstein, I warn you!"
"Devil, be quiet. Do not poison the air with your mal-
ice," said Frankenstein. "I have told you my decision,
and I am no coward to bend to your words. Leave me. I
shall never change my mind."
The monster raised his huge, scarred hand.
"Very well, I will go," he cried. "But remember, I shall
be with you on your wedding night."
122 FRANKENSTEIN
Frankenstein leaped forward in an attempt to attack
the monster. "Monster!" he exclaimed. "Before you
threaten me with death, be sure you are safe yourself!"
But the monster easily got away from Frankenstein
and ran out of the house. In a few moments, Franken-
stein saw him in his boat, which shot across the waters
with an arrowy swiftness and was soon lost amid the
waves.
All was again silent. But the monster's words rang in
Frankenstein's ears, and he burned with rage. Pacing up
and down the room, Frankenstein conjured up a thou-
sand tormenting images. How he wished he could have
killed the monster! Frankenstein shuddered to think who
might be the next victim sacrificed to the monster's re-
venge. Then he thought again of the monster's words.
"I will be with you on your wedding night."
So that was to be the moment of Frankenstein's death!
That was the hour in which he was to die at the mon-
ster's hands. Frankenstein had no fear for himself. But
he sorrowed for his lovely Elizabeth, when she should
find her lover dead, snatched from her arms by the mon-
ster in his vengeful malice. As Frankenstein thought of
Elizabeth's endless grief and sorrow, he vowed not to fall
before his enemy without a bitter struggle. |
The night passed and the sun rose from the ocean.
Frankenstein's feelings grew calmer, as the violence of
rage sank low into the depths of despair. He left the
house, the horrid scene of the night's conflict, and
walked on the beach. He wished he could pass his life on
THE MONSTER'S WIFE 123
that barren rock, because he knew that his return to the
world would mean his own death or the death of those
he most loved by a demon whom he himself had created.
Frankenstein walked about the island like a restless
spectre. Toward noon he lay down on the beach and
slept. In the evening when he awoke, he saw a fishing
boat land close by, and one of the men brought him a
packet of letters. Some were from Geneva. One letter
was from Clerval. It said that Henry was soon to leave
for India and asked that Frankenstein please join him for
his last few days in England. This letter recalled Fran-
kenstein to life, and he decided to leave the island.
Yet before he left, there was a task to perform, the
thought of which made him shudder. He must pack up
his chemical instruments. To do that, he would have to
enter his laboratory again, the scene of his odious work.
The next morning at daybreak, he unlocked the labo-
ratory door. The remains of the half-finished creature,
which he had destroyed, lay scattered on the floor. Fran-
kenstein almost felt as if he had mangled the living flesh
of a human being. He picked his way carefully through
the filthy mess and collected his instruments. Then he
reflected that he had better not leave the remains of his
work to horrify the islanders. He found a large basket
into which he put the pieces of the corpse, together with
some heavy stones, so that the basket would sink into the
sea. Frankenstein carried everything to the beach and
sat, cleaning and arranging his instruments, to wait for
the night to come.
124 FRANKENSTEIN
Between two and three o'clock in the morning, the
moon rose. He put his instruments and the basket aboard
a small skiff and sailed out about four miles from shore.
The scene was perfectly solitary. At one point, a thick
cloud hid the moon. Frankenstein took advantage of the
moment of darkness to throw the basket into the sea. He
listened to the gurgling sound as it sank, and then sailed
away.
A few moments later, the sky grew more clouded. The
wind, from the northeast, was high, and the waves began
to threaten the safety of the skiff. The wind drove him
farther and farther from the coast. He tried to change
course, but the boat began to fill with water and he
dared not try again. His only choice was to drive before
the wind. He had no compass and no idea where he was
going. Was he to sail into the wide Atlantic and be lost?
"In that case, the monster will be cheated of killing
me," he exclaimed. "Will he not then take his revenge on
my family, my friends?"
This thought plunged Frankenstein into a desperate
mood. He looked at the heavens, which were covered by
clouds that flew before the wind, only to be replaced by
others. He looked upon the sea, which might well be his
grave.
Hours passed. At last the wind died away into a gentle
breeze and the sea became free from breakers. Suddenly
he saw a line of high land toward the south. He steered
eagerly toward the wild and rocky coast, and sailed along
it until he found the harbor of a town.
THE MONSTER'S WIFE 125
People crowded to stare at him as he arranged his
sails, but no one greeted him and no one offered help.
Hearing them speak English to one another, Franken-
stein addressed them in that language.
"My good friends," he said, "will you be so kind as to
tell me where I am?"
"You will know that soon enough," said a man. "And
you may not like it, either."
Frankenstein was surprised to hear so rude a reply,
and to see nothing but anger on the faces of the people
gathering around him.
"Why do you answer me so roughly?" he asked. "The
English are not inhospitable to strangers."
"I don't know the customs of the English," answered
the man. "But here in Ireland, we don't like murderers!"
"TJ do not understand you," said Frankenstein, moving
forward onto the dock.
"You will soon," the man said roughly. "You will have
to come with me to Mr. Kirwin, the magistrate."
"But why?" cried Frankenstein.
"To give an account of the death of a gentleman who
was found murdered here last night," said the man.
Frankenstein accompanied the man without protest,
knowing perfectly well that he was innocent. Little did
he expect the calamity, the horror that was to overwhelm
him.
In the magistrate's office, half a dozen men came for-
ward to give evidence. They had been out fishing. A
strong northerly blast made them decide to return to
126 FRANKENSTEIN
port. In the dark, as they walked along the sands, they
had come upon the body of a handsome young man,
about twenty-five years old. He had apparently been
strangled. There were the black marks of fingers on his
neck.
Frankenstein barely listened to the first part of the
tale, but when the mark of fingers was mentioned, he
thought of William, and went pale.
Then another fisherman swore he had seen a boat with
a single man in it not far from shore, the same boat, he
thought, in which Frankenstein had landed.
A woman, who lived near the beach, testified that the
night before, she had seen a man come onto the beach in
a boat and then push off again.
The fishermen were agreed that in all probability,
Frankenstein had left the body on the beach and, be-
cause of the storm, could not get away from shore. He
had beaten about on the sea all night and had, this very
morning, been obliged to land again.
Mr. Kirwin, on hearing this evidence, desired that
Frankenstein should be taken into the room where the
body lay, in order to see what effect it would produce.
Frankenstein entered the room where the corpse lay and
was taken near the coffin. As he gazed down, his tongue
grew parched with horror, his eyes stared wildly, and he
trembled in every limb. What he saw, stretched out life-
less before him, was the body of Henry Clerval!
Frankenstein gasped for breath and threw himself on
the body.
THE MONSTER'S WIFE 127
"Have my murderous experiments deprived you also
of life, my dearest Henry?" Frankenstein cried out. "I
have already hurt one and destroyed another. Other vic-
tims await their destiny. But you, Clerval, my dearest
friend-"
Frankenstein could bear the agony no longer, and he
was carried out of the room in strong convulsions.
For two months, he lay in a fever, on the point of
death, raving about William, Justine, and Clerval. He
dreamed he felt the fingers of the monster already grasp-
ing his own neck, and screamed aloud with agony and
terror. He wanted to die, to escape the nightmare of his
life.
But Frankenstein was doomed to live, and in two
months the fever left him. He awoke surrounded by jail-
ers, turnkeys, bolts, and the bars of a prison. His first
thought was of the safety of his family. Was there a new
murder for him to lament? Had the monster wreaked
more destruction while Frankenstein had been sick?
"Your family is perfectly well," said Mr. Kirwin, visit-
ing Frankenstein in his dungeon. "I found some letters in
your pockets while you were ill and wrote to your father.
He has come to visit you."
In his father's presence, and after the excellent medical
care Mr. Kirwin had provided, Frankenstein soon grew
well. But he was sunk in a terrible gloom which nothing
could help.
"My poor son," murmured his father. "You traveled to
seek happiness, but a terrible fate seems to pursue you."
128 FRANKENSTEIN
"Alas, yes, my father," replied Frankenstein. "A
cursed destiny hangs over my head, which I must live to
fulfill. Otherwise, I would have died over the coffin of
my poor friend."
A month later, Frankenstein was tried for the murder
of Henry Clerval. It had been discovered, however, that
on the night of the murder, Frankenstein was still on the
Orkney Islands. He was acquitted and freed immediately
from prison.
His father wished him to rest longer, but Frankenstein
wanted desperately to get back to Geneva. His own life
was poisoned forever, but with his protection, the lives of
Elizabeth, Ernest, William, and his father might be
saved. He might still find a way to destroy the monster,
end its hideous life and even more hideous soul.
"2 8 [e-
The Doctor's Wedding
FRANKENSTEIN and his father left Ireland, traveling with-
out pause until they came to Paris. There Frankenstein,
still weak from his illness, had to stop for rest. His father
urged him to see people, to enjoy himself, but Franken-
stein felt he had no right to share in the delights of his
fellow beings. He had unchained an enemy among them,
whose joy it was to shed their blood. How people would
hate him if they knew of his unhallowed acts and the
crimes which had their source in him alone.
"Father, leave me be," said Frankenstein. "William,
Justine, Henry-all were attacked by my hand."
His father had often heard Frankenstein say this, but
thought these wild accusations were the result of his son's
fever. He therefore asked for no explanation, and Fran-
kenstein gave him none. He continued to maintain si-
lence about the wretch he had created, knowing that the
world would consider him mad. Besides, what was the
point in bringing deep fear and unnatural horror to his
father's heart.
130 FRANKENSTEIN
"Please don't say such things again," his father begged.
"Your imagination-"
"You think I am mad," cried Frankenstein. "But the
sun and the heavens, who have seen my operations, can
bear witness that I tell the truth. I am the murderer of
those innocent victims. A thousand times would I have
shed my own blood, drop by drop, to have saved their
lives. But I could not, my father! Indeed, I could not
sacrifice the whole human race."
The end of this speech convinced Frankenstein's father
that his son was deranged, and he shook his head sadly
and changed the subject. He did not let Frankenstein
speak of those things again.
As the weeks passed, Frankenstein grew calmer in his
manner and less violent in his speech. A few days before
they were to leave Paris, he received the following letter
from Elizabeth:-
"My Dear Victor,-I am so happy to know that you
are as near as Paris and that I may hope to see you
soon. I have spent such a miserable winter, worrying
about you. It has been a year and a half since you left
Geneva, and we have all missed you so much.
"I am only worried that the miserable feelings you
went away with are still with you now, perhaps even
worsened by your misfortunes. I do not like to disturb
you when you have so much on your mind, but I feel I
must tell you something before we meet again and explain
something which may ease you.
"We both know, Victor, that our marriage has been
your parents' favorite plan since our childhood. We were
told this when we were young and were taught to look
THE DOCTOR'S WEDDING 131
forward to it. We have always been playmates and good
friends to each other, but it is possible that this brotherly
affection is all you feel toward me. Tell me, dearest
Victor, do you not love another woman and was this
the cause of your misery?
"You have traveled and been away many years. When
you came back from Ingolstadt and I saw you so un-
happy, I confess that I thought it was because you loved
someone else but did not want to hurt me or your father.
But that was false reasoning, my dear friend. You cannot
throw away all chance of happiness to do your duty.
And it would make me miserable to think you married
me simply for the sake of honor.
"I confess to you, dear Victor, that I love you with
all my heart. I wish only for your happiness. Do not
answer this letter if it gives you pain. Only be happy
and remember that I am your friend.
ELIZABETH"
The letter revived in Frankenstein's memory what he
had not thought of for a while, the threat of the fiend-"T
will be with you on your wedding night." Such was Fran-
kenstein's death sentence, and on that night the fiend
would kill him, tear him away from the glimpse of hap-
piness that promised partly to console his sufferings. On
that night, the monster would end his crimes with Fran-
kenstein's death.
"So be it,' thought Frankenstein. "If he wins the
struggle, I shall be at peace. If I win, I shall be a free
man once more. Either way, his power over me will be
at an end.
Sweet, lovely Elizabeth, thought Frankenstein, as he
read and reread her letter. Softened feelings of joy stole
132 FRANKENSTEIN
into Frankenstein's heart which dared to whisper dreams
of love and joy-yet his fate had been decided long ago.
He wondered how quickly they ought to be married.
The sooner their marriage, the sooner Frankenstein
would die. But if he put the wedding off, the monster
might in the meantime find other means to take his re-
venge. He had vowed to be with Frankenstein on his
wedding night, yet he had not waited to shed blood and
had killed Henry Clerval. There was no point in delay-
ing. Marrying Elizabeth would make her and his father
happy, and Frankenstein was not afraid to die.
He returned with his father to Geneva. Elizabeth was
waiting. Frankenstein held out his arms and Elizabeth
flew into them with tears in her eyes.
"How silly of you to think even for a moment that I
didn't love you," said Frankenstein. "All the happiness I
hope for is centered in you. It is true that I have a secret
which makes me miserable. I will tell you about it after
we are married. But it has nothing to do with my love for
you. Let us be married as soon as possible."
Their marriage was set to take place in ten days. Fran-
kenstein had moments of tranquility, but these were
often swept away by memories of what had happened.
Memory brought madness, sometimes fits of rage and
sometimes the quiet of despair. Elizabeth alone had the
power to soothe him and to remind him of the joy they
would find in marriage. -
If for one instant Frankenstein had thought what
might be the hellish intention of his fiendish enemy, he
THE DOCTOR'S WEDDING 133
would rather have banished himself forever from his na-
tive country, and wandered a friendless outcast over the
earth, than have consented to this marriage. But the
monster had blinded Frankenstein to his real intentions
in making him prepare only for his own death.
As the day fixed for his marriage drew nearer, Fran-
kenstein felt his heart sink within him. But he concealed
his feelings as well as he could in order that his family
might be gay and happy at the coming event.
All preparations for the wedding were made. They
were to spend their honeymoon on the shores of Lake
Como at the Villa Lavenze, which had once belonged to
Elizabeth's family and had now been restored to her. In
the meantime, Frankenstein took every precaution to de-
fend himself, in case the fiend should openly attack him.
He carried pistols and a dagger constantly about him,
and was always on the watch to prevent any trickery. He
felt so well prepared that he began to be calm, even to
wonder whether the monster's threat was not just a
dream. Elizabeth's happiness made him happy, and soon
the day came when the marriage was to take place.
The marriage ceremony was performed peacefully in
the Frankenstein house. Afterward, there was a large
party, but Elizabeth and Frankenstein slipped away and
began their journey to Lake Como. It was a beautiful
day, with the sun warm and the air clear. As they trav-
eled together, Frankenstein experienced the last moments
of happiness of his life. He held Elizabeth's hand, and
together they gazed upon the shining, snowy Alps, the
134 FRANKENSTEIN
mighty Jura mountains, and the clear waters of the rivers
and lakes.
"Be happy, Victor," smiled Elizabeth. "How beautiful
the world is!"
Toward sundown, they came to Evian, on the eastern
shore of Lake Geneva, where they were to pass their first
night before going on to Lake Como. It was eight o'clock
when they arrived, and they walked for a short time on
the shore of the lake in the fading light to view the lovely
scene of water, woods, and mountains. The wind, which
had fallen in the south, now rose with great violence in
the west. The moon had reached its summit in the heav-
ens and was beginning to descend. The clouds swept
across the sky and restless waves rose upon the lake. No
sooner had they returned to the inn than a heavy rainstorm
began.
Frankenstein had been calm during the day, but now
the night and the storm made a thousand fears come to
his mind. At every noise, his hand grasped the pistol
which was hidden in his pocket, He was terrified, but he
resolved not to let his life go without a struggle.
Elizabeth watched him in timid and fearful silence, but
after awhile she said, "Victor, what is it that worries you
so? What do you fear?"
"Hush, hush, my love," Frankenstein replied. "After
tonight, all will be well. But this night I am filled with
dread."
Frankenstein spent an hour in this state of mind. Then
he thought how terrible it would be for Elizabeth to see
THE DOCTOR'S WEDDING 135
the battle he knew was coming, and he begged her to go
upstairs to bed.
"Pil come in a little while," he persuaded her. "It
won't be long now."
Elizabeth obeyed him. When she had gone, Franken-
stein walked up and down the halls of the inn in an at-
tempt to find his enemy. He looked into every corner
that might provide a hiding place, but could find no
. trace of the monster.
He was just beginning to wonder if some fortunate
chance had ruined the demon's plans, when suddenly he
heard a shrill and dreadful scream. It came from the
room in which Elizabeth had gone to bed. As Franken-.
stein heard the scream, the whole truth rushed into his
mind, and for an instant he remained motionless with
agony. The scream came again, and he rushed upstairs
and into Elizabeth's room.
There she was, motionless, thrown across the bed, her
bridal bed, with her head hanging down and her pale
face half covered by her hair. Frankenstein rushed to her
and took her in his arms. As he smoothed her hair back,
he saw that her eyes were closed and her mouth slightly
open, as if she were gasping for air. Her body was cold,
and on her neck were the marks, beginning to blacken,
of those huge and hideous fingers. He realized at once
that Elizabeth was dead.
"Elizabeth," Frankenstein groaned. "Oh, my dearest
Elizabeth, what have I done to you?"
While he still bent over Elizabeth in agony, he hap-
136 FRANKENSTEIN
pened to look up. The windows of the room had before
been darkened, and he felt a kind of panic on seeing the
pale yellow light of the moon illuminate the chamber.
The shutters had been thrown back, and with a sensation
of horror, he saw at the open window a figure, the loath-
some abhorred monster. A grin was on the monster's
black, wrinkled lips, and with a fiendish finger, he
pointed to the senseless Elizabeth. Frankenstein rushed
toward the window and, drawing out his pistol, fired. But
the monster escaped, leaped from the window, and run-
ning with the swiftness of lightning, plunged into the
lake.
Elizabeth's screams before, and now the sound of the
pistol, brought the inn people to the bedroom door. They
knocked to be let in. Frankenstein opened the door and
showed the men the spot where the attacker had disap-
peared. They searched all night, some groups on the
water, casting nets, and others searching through the
woods and about the countryside. It was hopeless. They
found no one.
Bewildered by such horror, Frankenstein's head
whirled round and his steps were like those of a drunken
man, as he returned to Elizabeth's room. There she lay,
his lovely Elizabeth, dead-murdered! Why hadn't Fran-
kenstein guessed whom the monster meant to attack?
"As I destroyed his wife," cried Frankenstein, "so he
destroyed mine!" | |
In an agony of despair, he threw himself on Eliz-
abeth's body and wept. Would his misfortunes never end?
THE DOCTOR'S WEDDING 137
138 FRANKENSTEIN
The fiend had snatched from him every hope of future
happiness. What more could happen!
Yet what of his father, of Ernest, of little Wilham?
Would the monster now attack the rest of his family, one
by one? Frankenstein had to get back to Geneva. Dash-
ing from the room, he ordered horses and a carriage for
the following day.
He arrived in Geneva that night, just before the gates
were closed. Frankenstein raced into the house. Ernest
still lived. But his father, having received news of Eliz-
abeth's death, could no longer support the horrors of his
life. A few hours before Frankenstein's arrival, he had
died. The cursed demon had claimed another victim!
Wild with anger and remorse, grief for his father and
Elizabeth, Frankenstein nearly went mad. He was now
possessed by a rage so violent, a hatred so intense, that
he thought of nothing but to take revenge on the mon-
ster, the vile demon who was destroying his family.
This time, however, Frankenstein did not confine him-
self to useless wishes to punish the monster. He wanted
the monster within his grasp. To capture him, Franken-
stein knew he would need help. At long last, he decided
to do what he had never been able to bring himself to do
before-to tell his story publicly and ask for the help of
the police.
Frankenstein went to the magistrate's office. The mag-
istrate, Mr. Zucker, aware of the importance of the
Frankenstein family and sympathetic with their recent
tragedies, greeted his visitor with courtesy and attention.
THE DOCTOR'S WEDDING 139
"Do sit down, Dr. Frankenstein," said the magistrate.
"Only tell me what I can do for you, and I shall be glad
to be of assistance."
"Thank you, Mr. Zucker," said Frankenstein. He
looked directly at the magistrate's face and said slowly,
"I have an accusation to make. I know who is destroying
my family. I shall need all the help it is in your authority
to give in order to catch him."
"Be assured, sir, that I shall spare no effort to find the
attacker," answer the magistrate. "Do sit down, sir."
Frankenstein had been pacing up and down the magis-
trate's office as he spoke.
"Thank you," said Frankenstein. But he continued, in
his agitation, to walk about. "Listen, then, to a story so
strange that I hardly dare hope you will believe it. And
yet, remember, as I speak, that I have no motive for
lying and that I swear everything I am about to tell you
is the truth. You will see, I hope, that the story is too
connected to be mistaken for a dream."
His decision to pursue his enemy to the death had
quieted his agony and enabled him to speak of these
matters without raving wildly at every word.
He told the magistrate the history of the past seven
and a half years, from the time he had first left Geneva
for the University of Ingolstadt to study natural science.
He spoke of his discoveries, his experiments, his incred-
ible creation, and the catastrophes that followed, with
firmness and precision, marking the dates with accuracy
and keeping his speech free of curses and raging.
140 FRANKENSTEIN
As he spoke, Frankenstein saw that Mr. Zucker ap-
peared at first totally disbelieving and then, after a while,
attentive and interested. Sometimes Frankenstein saw
him shudder with horror, at other times look surprised,
yet believing.
When Frankenstein had finished his tale, he added,
"This is the being whom I accuse, and for whose seizure
and punishment I call on you to exert your whole power.
It is your duty as a magistrate. I believe and hope that
your human fears and revulsion will not prevent you
from performing your duty."
These words caused a great change in the magistrate's
expression. He had listened to Frankenstein's story with
that half-belief people bring to tales of the supernatural,
but when he was called upon to act officially, the whole
tide of his disbelief returned.
However, he answered mildly. Pushing back his chair
with a sigh and a wave of his hand, Mr. Zucker rose and
walked over to the window where Frankenstein stood.
"T would willingly give you help in your pursuit," said
the magistrate. "But the creature of whom you speak ap-
pears to have powers which make him impossible to
catch. Who can follow a creature who can cross a sea of
ice at such speeds and live in caves and dens where no
man would dare go?" Mr. Zucker shrugged. "Besides, it
has been some time since his last crime, and no one
knows to what place he-may have wandered, or what
region he may now inhabit."
Frankenstein turned sharply to face the magistrate.
THE DOCTOR'S WEDDING 141
"I do not doubt that he hovers near the spot where I
live. But if he has indeed taken refuge in the Alps, he
may be hunted like the mountain deer, and destroyed as
a beast of prey. But I understand your thoughts. You do
not believe my story. And you do not intend to pursue
my enemy with the punishment which he deserves."
As Frankenstein spoke, rage sparkled in his eyes and
he frightened Mr. Zucker.
"You are mistaken," said the magistrate. "I will try,
and if it is in my power to seize the monster, be assured
that he will suffer punishment for his crimes. But I fear,
from what you yourself have said about him, that no
matter how hard we try, we shall never find him. I am
afraid, therefore, that you must make up your mind to
be disappointed."
"That cannot be!" cried Frankenstein. "But I see that
it does not matter what I say. My revenge does not mat-
ter to you. I know that revenge is a vice, but I confess
that it has become the devouring and only passion of my
soul. My rage is unspeakable when I think that the mon-
ster is still alive, that this monster I let loose upon the
world still exists. You will not or cannot help me. There
is only one thing for me to do-and that is to devote
myself, either in life or death, to his destruction."
The Genevan magistrate stared at Frankenstein as if
he were insane. He tried to soothe Frankenstein as if he
were a child and again treated his story as if it were the
result of a nightmare.
"You do not understand," cried Frankenstein in a
142 FRANKENSTEIN
frenzy. "In your ignorance, you do not even know what
you are saying!"
At this, Frankenstein broke from the magistrate's office
and ran out of the building, angry and disturbed. He
would have to think of another way.
"oJ 9 [e-
Final Revenge
FRANKENSTEIN'S POWERS of reasoning were swallowed up
and lost in his fury. Revenge alone gave him strength. It
shaped his feelings and allowed him to be calculating
and calm, when otherwise madness or death would have
been his fate.
His first decision was to leave Geneva forever, or for
as long as it took to track the monster down. His parents
both dead, Elizabeth horribly murdered, he left William
in Ernest's care. Providing himself with some money, to-
gether with a few jewels which had belonged to his
mother, Frankenstein departed on his wanderings, which
were to cease, if need be, only with his death. Where he
was to travel, over what vast portions of the earth, he did
not know. He did not care what hardships he would have
to endure, what hunger or cold or barbarity he would
have to suffer. Revenge would keep him alive. He dared
not die and leave his enemy alive.
When Frankenstein left Geneva, he knew his first task
was to find some clue by which he could trace the steps
144 FRANKENSTEIN
of his fiendish creation. But his plans were not yet
formed, and he wandered near Geneva for some hours,
not knowing what path to follow. As night came, he
found himself at the entrance of the cemetery where his
mother, his father, Elizabeth, and Justine were buried.
He entered it and approached the tomb which marked
their graves. Everything was silent, except for the wind in
the trees, and the night was nearly dark. The spirits of
the dead seemed to flit around and to cast a shadow,
which he felt but could not see.
His deep grief gave way again to rage and despair.
They were dead, and he lived. Their murderer also lived,
and to destroy him, Frankenstein had to go on dragging
out his weary existence. He kneeled on the grass and
spoke aloud.
"T swear, on your graves, to pursue the demon who
caused this misery until he or I shall die in the conflict.
For revenge only will I go on living. And I call on you,
spirits of the dead, and on you, spirits of vengeance, to
help me and show me the way. Let the accursed and
hellish monster drink deep of agony. Let him feel the
despair that now torments me!"
As Frankenstein's voice rose, he felt the furies possess
him and the spirits of the dead surround him and ap-
prove his words. He went on speaking until rage choked
his throat. ,
He was answered through the stillness of the night by
a loud and fiendish laugh. It rang on his ears long and
heavily. The mountains echoed the sound, and Franken-
FINAL REVENGE 145
stein felt as if all hell surrounded him with mockery and
laughter. As the hideous noise died away, a well-known
and abhorred voice, apparently close to his ear, spoke to
him in a whisper.
"T am Satisfied," said the voice. "You have decided to
go on living, and I am satisfied."
Frankenstein ran toward the spot where the sound
seemed to come from. But the devil escaped Franken-
stein's grasp. Suddenly the moon arose and shone full
upon the ghastly and distorted shape as it fled with more
than human speed. Only for a moment, the monster
paused and made a motion with his arm as if to beckon
his creator onward. Then he fled once more across the
fields.
Frankenstein pursued him. He followed any clue he
could find. Often the clues were false and he lost many
days in searching vainly along the windings of the Rhone
River. One day, the blue Mediterranean Sea appeared
before him, and, by a strange chance, he saw the fiend
hide himself in a ship bound for the Black Sea. Franken-
stein got on the same ship. But the monster escaped,
Frankenstein did not know how.
Through the Ukraine and north into the wilds of
Russia, Frankenstein followed in the monster's tracks. °
Sometimes, villagers who had been scared by this horrid
apparition informed Frankenstein of the monster's path.
Sometimes, the monster himself, wanting Frankenstein to
follow him, left some clue to guide his creator.
Soon it was winter. When the snows came, Franken-
146 FRANKENSTEIN
stein was able to see the monster's huge footprints on
the white plain. The young doctor suffered terribly from
cold and hunger. Once in a while, the country people
fed him, but. mostly he lived by hunting wild animals
that crossed his path and drinking the rain that fell from
the sky.
Frankenstein followed, when he could, the courses of
the rivers. But the demon generally avoided rivers, be-
cause too many people lived along their banks. He there-
fore forced his pursuer deep into the wilds, the desert
places, and the forests. Often, Frankenstein came close to
exhaustion, starvation and death, but these were nothing
compared to the torture of knowing that the monster was
still alive.
Only in sleep did Frankenstein find peace. When he
slept, he dreamed that Henry and Elizabeth had never
been killed, and that Justine and his father were still
alive. When he dreamed, he heard their voices happy as
they had been long ago. When he woke, his desire for re-
venge became fiercer still.
What the monster's feelings were, Frankenstein did
not know. Sometimes, the monster left messages written
on the bark of trees or cut in stone, to guide his pursuer
and make him even more furious.
"My reign is not yet over," said one message. "You
live, and my power is complete. Follow me. I seek the
everlasting ices of the north, where you will feel the mis-
ery of cold and frost which do not bother me. You will
find near here a dead rabbit. Eat it and grow strong.
FINAL REVENGE 147
Come on, my enemy. We have yet to fight for our lives.
But you will still have to go through many miserable
hours until that moment arrives."
Jeering devil! Again, Frankenstein vowed vengeance
and promised the miserable fiend a tortured death.
As Frankenstein went northward, the snows thickened
and the cold grew almost too terrible to bear. The rivers
were covered with ice and food was nearly impossible to
find.
The triumph of Frankenstein's enemy increased with
these hardships. He left another message for his follower.
"Prepare! Your toils only begin. Wrap yourself in furs
and buy food. For we shail soon enter upon a journey
where your sufferings will satisfy my everlasting hatred."
These words only served to increase Frankenstein's
courage and fury. He resolved not to fail and continued
to cross immense frozen deserts until, not far from the
port of Archangel, he saw at a distance the frozen White
Sea.
Frankenstein had been traveling, for the past few
weeks, by dog sled, which had allowed him to go so
much faster that he had begun to gain on the monster.
Now the fiend was only one day's journey ahead of him,
and he hoped to catch up before the monster should
reach the shore. With new courage, therefore, Franken-
stein pressed on, and in two days arrived at a wretched
village at the sea's edge. He asked the villagers about the
fiend and received accurate information.
A gigantic monster, they said, had arrived the night
148 FRANKENSTEIN
before, armed with a gun and many pistols, and had
frightened away the people who lived in one of the cot-
tages. He had carried off their winter store of food and
placed the food on a sled. He had then seized many of
the village's trained dogs, harnessed them, and driven off
across the frozen sea. The villagers thought the monster
would soon be destroyed by the breaking of the ice or
frozen by the eternal frosts.
On hearing this, Frankenstein nearly despaired. The
monster had escaped him. He must now begin a destruc-
tive and almost endless journey across the mountainous
ices of the ocean-in cold that few humans could stand
for long. Yet the thought that the fiend should live and
be triumphant made Frankenstein's rage return and he
prepared to follow the monster once more.
He exchanged his land sled for one made to travel the
frozen oceans, and he bought dogs to pull the sled and
food to carry with him. Then he departed from the land
to cross the White Sea and the Barents Sea, to reach at
last the Arctic Ocean. He could scarcely tell how many
days passed as he crossed the immense whiteness. Huge
and rugged mountains of ice often barred his passage,
and he heard the thunder of the ground sea which
threatened his destruction, should the ice break up. But
again the ice refroze and made the paths of the sea safe.
He could tell from the amount of food left that about
three weeks had passed. Struggling over the top of a
sloping ice-mountain, Frankenstein suddenly saw a dark
speck on the white plain ahead. He strained his sight to
FINAL REVENGE 149
discover what it could be and uttered a wild cry when he
saw the outline of a sled and the deformed proportions
of a well-known form. There was no time to delay! He
fed the dogs to give them strength and raced after the
speck in the distance. The sled was still visible. Franken-
stein did not lose sight of it except now and then when
some ice rock hid it momentarily from view. So quickly
did he gain on the monster's sled that after two days he
saw his enemy at no more than a mile's distance.
But then, when the monster seemed almost within
Frankenstein's grasp, he suddenly lost all trace of him. A
ground sea was heard. The thunder of its progress, as the
waters rolled and swelled beneath him, became every
moment more terrible. He pressed on, but it was no use.
The wind rose. The sea roared. With the mighty shock of
an earthquake, the ice split and cracked with a tremen-
dous sound. In a few minutes, a wild sea rolled between
Frankenstein and his enemy, and Frankenstein was left
drifting on a piece of ice which was growing smaller all
the time. Soon he must be prepared for a hideous death.
A few hours passed. Several of the dogs died. Fran-
kenstein himself was on the brink of total collapse, when,
not far off, he saw an unbelievable sight. It was a ship.
He had never known of a vessel to come so far north and
the sight astounded him. Quickly he destroyed part of his
sled to make oars, and began to move his ice-raft in the
direction of the ship.
The ship's captain had his men pull Frankenstein on
board. He was more dead than alive, but after a week
150 FRANKENSTEIN
under the captain's care, he had recovered enough to
talk.
"Are you going north?" Frankenstein asked.
"Yes," replied the captain. "I am making a scientific
voyage to the North Pole." The captain stared at Fran-
kenstein, noting the wild expression in his guest's eyes,
the suffering so evident on his face and in his thin and
feverish body. He felt sorry for Frankenstein and wished
to know if he could be of any help. "Why did you come
so far on the ice?" the captain asked.
i am searching for someone who has run away from
" Frankenstein answered.
BIE the man you pursue travel on a dog sled?" asked
the captain.
ay ese
"Then I think we have seen him," the captain said.
"The day we picked you up, we saw some dogs pulling a
sled with a huge man in it across the ice."
At this, Frankenstein grew excited and questioned the
captain more closely.
"Do you think the breaking up of the ice might have
destroyed the sled?" Frankenstein asked.
"It is possible," the captain replied. "But the ice did
not finish breaking up until midnight, and the traveler
might have reached a place of safety by then."
"T must remain on deck to watch," said Frankenstein
wildly. :
"Please," begged the captain kindly, "please rest. You
are still so weak. I will have one of my men watch for
FINAL REVENGE 151
you. Allow me to introduce myself. My name is Captain
Walton."
"IT am Dr. Frankenstein and I thank you for your kind-
ness," Frankenstein replied. "Why are you making this
difficult voyage, sir?" he asked, as the captain led him
back to his cabin.
"Since my boyhood," answered Captain Walton, "I
have wanted more than anything else in the world to dis-
cover new knowledge about the earth, particularly in
these northern reaches."
A groan burst from Frankenstein. "Unhappy man!" he
cried. "Do you share my madness for discovery, then?
Let me tell you my own tale, and you will give up the
search for knowledge and wisdom, and understand the
danger of meddling in things better left alone."
"J can see by the grief in your eyes that you have suf-
fered terrible misfortunes," said Captain Walton. "I
sympathize and would like to help you if I can."
"Thank you for your sympathy," responded Franken-
stein, "but it is useless. My fate is nearly fulfilled. I wait
for only one thing, and then I shall be in peace. If you
like, I will tell you my history and then you will
understand."
Captain Walton listened, horrified and appalled, to
Frankenstein's story. When he had finished, Captain
Walton offered Frankenstein his hand and once again his
help.
"The only help for me," said Frankenstein, "is the
death of the monster. He must not live to add to the list
152 FRANKENSTEIN
of his dark crimes. If I should die and you should ever
see him, kill him if you can. Do not listen to him, for he
is very persuasive. Once his words had power even over
my heart. But do not trust him. His soul is as hellish as
his form, full of treachery and fiendish malice."
"T believe your story and will do all within my power,"
answered Captain Walton.
"And do you now understand the danger of high ambi-
tions in the realms of undiscovered knowledge?" added
Frankenstein. "My thoughts and imagination went as
high as the heavens, and now I am chained in an eternal
hell. Once I exulted in my powers to be useful to human-
ity, but I failed, and my life has been ruined by my mad
scheme."
It was now September. Frankenstein had been on
board the ship for a month, each day growing weaker
and more feverish. The ice, which had never broken up
enough for the ship to move on, began to thicken and
close about the ship until it was in danger of being
crushed. The cold was terrible and the crew was
frightened.
In the middle of the month, the ice began to move
again, and roarings like thunder were heard at a distance
as the islands split and cracked. Soon the ice near the
ship cracked, and huge ice floes were driven north,
leaving a clear passage to the south. The-sailors begged
Captain Walton not to go farther north, but to return to
England. Captain Walton was forced to consent.
"You go," said Frankenstein, when he heard this, "but
FINAL REVENGE 153
I cannot. In a fit of enthusiastic madness, I created a
rational creature to whom I owed happiness and well-
being. But I could not give him that happiness without
endangering my own species to whom I owe an even
greater duty. In return for my refusing to create a wife
for him, the monster destroyed my family and friends.
Miserable himself, he devotes himself to making others
miserable. He must be destroyed, and I must destroy
him."
"But you cannot remain behind, and I must sail in the
morning," said the captain.
"T must remain here, and I will," said Frankenstein
firmly. He went out on deck to spend his last night on
board watching.
"We will take turns," said the captain, noting how pale
and ill Frankenstein looked. "You go below and rest for
a few hours, and later on I will wake you."
Frankenstein nodded and returned to the cabin. The
captain kept watch for an hour, and then he heard a
strange and unusual sound. It was coming from below,
from the cabin where Frankenstein slept. The captain
dashed below decks and flung open the cabin door. His
jaw hung open in horror.
He saw immediately that Frankenstein was dead-
whether from the feverish illness he suffered, or from
shock, the captain never knew. Over the dead Franken-
stein hung a gigantic figure, deformed and hideous. As
he bent over Frankenstein, long locks of ragged hair hid
his face from the captain's view, but one vast hand was
154 FRANKENSTEIN
stretched out. To the captain, the hand appeared like
that of a mummy. At the sound of the captain's entrance,
the monster turned quickly around. Never had the cap-
tain seen anything so horrible as that face, hideous to
begin with and now distorted even more by a strange
combination of rage and sorrow.
"That is also my victim,' the monster whispered
hoarsely, pointing at Frankenstein. "Now that he is dead,
my crimes are complete. Ah, Frankenstein. What use is it
now that I ask your pardon-I who, in destroying all you
loved, destroyed you! Alas, he is cold-he cannot answer
me."
The captain thought of his promise to Frankenstein, to
kill the monster if he appeared. But curiosity, and a cer-
tain sympathy for the monster's sorrow, made him wish
to speak to the monster first. He approached the tremen-
dous being. He dared not raise his eyes again to the
monster's face, there was something so frightening and
unearthly in its ugliness.
"If you wanted forgiveness," said the captain, "you
should have thought of it long ago and not pushed your
diabolical vengeance this far!"
"And do you think," said the demon, "that I did not
feel agony-and remorse for what I did?" The monster
pointed to Frankenstein. "He did not suffer a thousandth
of the agony that I suffered performing those hellish
deeds. A frightful selfishness hurried me onward, while
my heart was poisoned with remorse. Do you think the
groans of Clerval were music to my ears? My heart was
FINAL REVENGE SIS)
made for love and sympathy. And when it was made by
misery to feel hatred, I suffered tortures you cannot
imagine.
"After the murder of Clerval, I returned to Switzerland
heart-broken. I pitied Frankenstein. My pity amounted
to horror. I abhorred myself. But when I discovered that
he, the creator of my life and my torments, dared to
hope for happiness, that he, having destroyed my wife,
was about to find joy in his own, then envy and bitter-
ness filled me with rage. I wanted revenge, and I remem-
bered my own threat to be with him on his wedding
night. I could not help myself. Yet afterward, I was no
longer miserable. I had cast off all feeling, all anguish.
Evil thenceforth became my good. Having gone so far, I
had no choice but to adapt myself to the plan I had be-
gun. And now it has ended. There is my last victim!"
At first, the captain was touched by the things the
monster said. But he remembered Frankenstein's warn-
ing about the monster's powers of persuasion, and he
grew angry again.
"Wretch!" said Captain Walton. "How dare you come
here to whine over the destruction you yourself have
caused. You set fire to a house, and then you cry when it
burns. You are indeed a fiend!" ,
"No," whispered the monster softly. "You are wrong.
But I do not seek pity. I shall never find sympathy. I nev-
er did, even when I was virtuous. How I longed then for
someone to overlook my outward form and return my
love. I had high thoughts then of honor and loyalty. But
156 FRANKENSTEIN
now crime has lowered me beneath the meanest animal.
No guilt, no misery can be found as great as mine. So
how could I seek for sympathy? I am content to suffer
alone as long as I live, and die with curses flung at my
memory. I cannot believe I am the same creature whose
thoughts were once full of beauty and kindness. But it is
so. The fallen angel becomes a devil.
"Yet, while I destroyed Frankenstein's life, I did not
satisfy my own desires. I still wanted love and fellowship,
yet always, all my life everyone has spurned me. Why
does man not hate Felix, who drove me out? Or the fa-
ther who shot me when I saved his child? But no. People
hate only me, the miserable, the abandoned, an abortion
to be kicked, spurned, and trampled on.
"But it is true that I am a wretch. I have drawn my
creator to his ruin. But do not fear. I shall cause no more
terror. I shall seek the most northern place of the globe. I
shall collect my funeral pyre, light it, and throw myself
upon its fire. The flames will consume me and my ashes
will blow out to sea so that no man, seeing my remains,
can learn from them how to construct another such as I.
I will no longer be miserable, no longer see the sun or
stars, or feel the winds play on my cheeks. Light, feeling,
sense will pass away. Damned{as I am, where can I find
peace except in death. Years ago, I should have wept to
die. But no longer," said the monster sadly and solemnly.
"Farewell. Farewell to you, the last human being whose
eyes will ever see me. And Frankenstein, my creator,
farewell."
FINAL REVENGE
158 FRANKENSTEIN
As he said this, the monster leaped from the cabin
window on to the ice-raft which lay close to the ship. The
captain could do nothing but stare after the monster, who
was soon borne away by the waves and lost in darkness
and distance.
; The fond
+e
2 iebezeeenae es
sinter pe ersa egy ee ae
Wate rat
$3 rere Sek Maren she feeds,
as ee ies
om

CliffsTestPrep
The NEW *SAT
includes the New *PSAT/NMSQT
3RD EDITION
by
Jerry Bobrow, Ph.D.
Contributing Authors/Consultants
Bernard V . Zandy, M.S.
William A. Covino, Ph.D.
Allan Casson, Ph.D.
Jean Eggenschwiler, M.A.
Don Gallaher, M.S.
CliffsTestPrep
The NEW *SAT
includes the New *PSAT/NMSQT
3RD EDITION
by
Jerry Bobrow, Ph.D.
Contributing Authors/Consultants
Bernard V . Zandy, M.S.
William A. Covino, Ph.D.
Allan Casson, Ph.D.
Jean Eggenschwiler, M.A.
Don Gallaher, M.S.
CliffsTestPrep® The NEW *SAT, 3rd Edition
Published by:
Wiley Publishing, Inc.
111 River Street
www.wiley.com
Published by Wiley, Hoboken, NJ
Published simultaneously in Canada
Bobrow, Jerry.
The NEW SAT / by Jerry Bobrow; contributing authors, Bernard V . Zandy ... [et al.].- 3rd ed.
p. cm.- (CliffsTestPrep)
Includes bibliographical references.
1. Scholastic Assessment Test-Study guides. 2. Preliminary Scholastic Assessment Test-Study guides. 3. Universities and colleges-United States-Entrance
Examinations-Study guides. I. Title. II. Series.
3B/RX/RS/QU/IN
Department, Wiley Publishing, Inc., 10475 Crosspoint Blvd., Indianapolis, IN 46256, 317-572-3447, or fax 317-572-4355.
THE PUBLISHER AND THE AUTHOR MAKE NO REPRESENTATIONS OR W ARRANTIES WITH RESPECT TO THE ACCURACY OR COMPLETE-
NESS OF THE CONTENTS OF THIS WORK AND SPECIFICALLY DISCLAIM ALL W ARRANTIES, INCLUDING WITHOUT LIMITATION W AR-
RANTIES OF FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE. NO W ARRANTY MAY BE CREATED OR EXTENDED BY SALES OR PROMOTIONAL
MATERIALS. THE ADVICE AND STRATEGIES CONTAINED HEREIN MAY NOT BE SUITABLE FOR EVERY SITUATION. THIS WORK IS SOLD
WITH THE UNDERSTANDING THAT THE PUBLISHER IS NOT ENGAGED IN RENDERING LEGAL, ACCOUNTING, OR OTHER PROFESSIONAL
SERVICES. IF PROFESSIONAL ASSISTANCE IS REQUIRED, THE SERVICES OF A COMPETENT PROFESSIONAL PERSON SHOULD BE SOUGHT.
NEITHER THE PUBLISHER NOR THE AUTHOR SHALL BE LIABLE FOR DAMAGES ARISING HEREFROM. THE FACT THAT AN ORGANIZATION
OR WEBSITE IS REFERRED TO IN THIS WORK AS A CITATION AND/OR A POTENTIAL SOURCE OF FURTHER INFORMATION DOES NOT
MEAN THAT THE AUTHOR OR THE PUBLISHER ENDORSES THE INFORMATION THE ORGANIZATION OR WEBSITE MAY PROVIDE OR REC-
OMMENDATIONS IT MAY MAKE. FURTHER, READERS SHOULD BE AW ARE THAT INTERNET WEBSITES LISTED IN THIS WORK MAY HA VE
CHANGED OR DISAPPEARED BETWEEN WHEN THIS WORK W AS WRITTEN AND WHEN IT IS READ.
Trademarks: Wiley, the Wiley Publishing logo, CliffsNotes, the CliffsNotes logo, Cliffs, CliffsAP, CliffsComplete, CliffsQuickReview, CliffsStudySolver,
CliffsTestPrep, CliffsNote-a-Day, cliffsnotes.com, and all related trademarks, logos, and trade dress are trademarks or registered trademarks of John Wiley & Sons,
Inc. and/or its affiliates. *SAT is a registered trademark of the College Board, which was not involved in the production of, and does not endorse, this product.
PSAT/NMSQT is a registered trademark jointly owned by the College Board and the National Merit Scholarship Corporation, which were not involved in the pro-
duction of, and do not endorse, this product. All other trademarks are the property of their respective owners. Wiley Publishing, Inc. is not associated with any
product or vendor mentioned in this book.
For general information on our other products and services or to obtain technical support, please contact our Customer Care Department within the U.S. at
Wiley also publishes its books in a variety of electronic formats. Some content that appears in print may not be available in electronic books. For more information
about Wiley products, please visit our web site at www.wiley.com.
About the Author
Jerry Bobrow, Ph.D., is a national authority in the field of
test preparation. As executive director of Bobrow Test
Preparation Services, he has been administering the test
preparation programs at more than 25 California institutions
for the past 30 years. Dr. Bobrow has authored more than 40
national best-selling test preparation books, and his books
and programs have assisted more than two million test-
takers. Each year, Dr. Bobrow personally lectures to thou-
sands of students on preparing for graduate, college, and
teacher credentialing exams.
I would like to thank Michele Spence for her many hours of
editing the original manuscript, and Christina Stambaugh,
of Wiley, for her assistance and careful attention to the pro-
duction process. I would also like to thank my office staff of
Joy Mondragon, Cindy Hadash, and Deena Mondragon for
their assistance. Finally, I would like to thank my wife,
Susan; daughter, Jennifer; and sons, Adam and Jonathan, for
their patience, moral support, and comic relief.
Publisher's Acknowledgments
Editorial
Project Editor: Christina Stambaugh
Acquisitions Editor: Greg Tubach
Copy Editor: Christina Stambaugh
Production
Proofreader: Debbye Butler
Wiley Publishing, Inc. Composition Services
Note: If you purchased this book without a cover,
you should be aware that this book is stolen property.
It was reported as "unsold and destroyed" to the pub-
lisher, and neither the author nor the publisher has
received any payment for this "stripped book."
Table of Contents
PSAT/NMSQT Study Guide Checklist . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . x
Comparing the "Older" SAT to the New SAT . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 3
Questions Commonly Asked about the New SAT . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 4
Taking the New SAT: Successful Overall Approaches for Multiple-Choice Questions . . . . . . 6
IV. The Multiple-Multiple-Choice Technique . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 7
PART I: ANAL YSIS OF EXAM AREAS
Introduction to the Critical Reading Section . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 11
Suggested Approaches with Samples . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 11
Critical Reading Passages (Short and Long) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1 9
Suggested Approaches with Sample Passages . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1 9
Short Paragraph-Length Reading Passages . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 28
Specific Strategies for Questions Based on Paired Passages . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 31
Introduction to the Mathematics Section . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 39
Basic Skills and Concepts that You Should Know . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 40
Data Analysis, Statistics, and Probability . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 41
Suggested Approaches with Samples . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 42
Suggested Approaches with Samples . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 74
Introduction to the Writing Section-Essay . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 89
Two Well-Written Essays (with Comments) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 96
Eight Important Points to Consider When Writing . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 97
Introduction to the Writing Section-Multiple Choice . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 101
Identifying Sentence Error Questions (Usage) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1 03
Suggested Approaches with Samples . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1 03
Improving Sentences Questions (Sentence Correction) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 11 0
Suggested Approaches with Samples . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 11 0
Improving Paragraphs Questions (Revision in Context) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1 20
A Special Look at Sentence Combining . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1 20
Suggested Approaches with Samples . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1 21
iv
CliffsTestPrep The NEW SAT, 3rd Edition
v
Table of Contents
PART II: PRACTICE-REVIEW-ANAL YZE-PRACTICE
Writing-Multiple-Choice Analysis Sheet . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1 90
Analysis/Tally Sheet for Problems Missed . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1 91
Complete Answers and Explanations for Practice Test 1 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1 91
Writing-Multiple-Choice Analysis Sheet . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 275
Analysis/Tally Sheet for Problems Missed . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 275
Complete Answers and Explanations for Practice Test 2 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 276
vi
CliffsTestPrep The NEW SAT, 3rd Edition
Writing-Multiple-Choice Analysis Sheet . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 364
Analysis/Tally Sheet for Problems Missed . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 365
Complete Answers and Explanations for Practice Test 3 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 365
SAT Score Range Approximator . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 387
How to Approximate Your Score in Critical Reading . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 387
How to Approximate Your Score in Mathematics . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 388
How to Approximate Your Score in Writing . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 388
PART III: ABOUT THE PSAT/NMSQT
Introduction to the PSAT/NMSQT . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 393
Critical Reading, Math, and Writing Skills Sections . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 394
Analysis/Tally Sheet for Problems Missed . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 434
Complete Answers and Explanations for PSAT/NMSQT Practice Test . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 435
PSAT/NMSQT Score Range Approximator . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 449
How to Approximate Your Score in Critical Reading . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 449
How to Approximate Your Score in Mathematics . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 449
How to Approximate Your Score in Writing Skills . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 450
vii
Table of Contents
viii
Preface
The SAT and PSAT/NMSQT have changed, but good scores can still make the difference! And because of these
facts, you can't afford to take a chance. Prepare with the best! Because better scores result from thorough prepara-
tion, your study time must be used most effectively. CliffsTestPrep The NEW SAT,3rd Edition has been designed
by leading experts in the field of test preparation to be the most comprehensive guide that you can realistically
complete in a reasonable time. In keeping with the fine tradition of CliffsNotes, this guide is written for the stu-
dent. It is direct, precise, compact, easy to use, and thorough. The testing strategies, techniques, and materials have
been researched, tested, and evaluated and are presently used in SAT test preparation programs at many leading
colleges and universities. This book emphasizes the Bobrow Test Preparation Services approach, developed during
the past 30 years with thousands of students in preparation programs. The Bobrow approach focuses on the six
major areas that should be considered when preparing for the new SAT:
1. Ability Tested
2. Basic Skills Necessary
3. Understanding Directions
4. Analysis of Directions
5. Suggested Approaches with Samples
6. Practice-Review-Analyze-Practice
This guide combines introductory analysis sections for each exam area with lots of practice-four full-length
practice tests (three new SATs and one new PSAT/NMSQT). These practice tests have complete answers, in-depth
explanations, analysis charts, and score range approximators to give you a thorough understanding of the new SAT
and PSAT/NMSQT.
CliffsTestPrep The NEW SATwas written to give you the edge in doing your best by giving you maximum benefit
in a reasonable amount of time and is meant to augment, not substitute for, formal or informal learning throughout
junior high and high school.
Don't take a chance. Be prepared! Follow the Study Guide Checklist in this book and study regularly. You'll get
the best test preparation possible.
SAT Study Guide Checklist
❑ 1. Read the new SAT information bulletin. Get information online at www.collegeboard.org.
❑ 2. Become familiar with the test format, page 1.
❑ 3. Familiarize yourself with the answers to Questions Commonly Asked about the new SAT, pages 4-6.
❑ 4. Learn the techniques of the Successful Overall Approaches, pages 6-8.
❑ 5. Carefully read Part I: Analysis of Exam Areas, beginning on page 9.
❑ 6. Strictly observing time allotments, take Practice Test 1, section by section (take Section 1 and then check
your answers; take Section 2 and then check your answers, and so on), beginning on page 133.
❑ 7. Review the answers and explanations for each question on Practice Test 1, beginning on page 191.
❑ 8. Analyze your Practice Test 1 answers by filling out the analysis charts, pages 189-191. Have a teacher,
tutor, or knowledgeable friend review your essay using the checklist included.
❑ 9. Review your math skills as necessary.
❑ 10. Review or reread Part I: Analysis of Exam Areas, beginning on page 9, to see whether you applied some
of the strategies.
❑ 11. Strictly observing time allotments, take Practice Test 2, beginning on page 219. Take a very short break
after each hour of testing.
❑ 12. Check your answers and use the Score Range Approximator (pages 387-388) to get a very general score
range.
❑ 13. Analyze your Practice Test 2 answers by filling out the analysis charts on pages 273-275. Have a teacher,
tutor, or knowledgeable friend review your essay using the checklist included.
❑ 14. While referring to each item of Practice Test 2, study all of the answers and explanations that begin on
❑ 15. Selectively review some basic skills as necessary.
❑ 16. Strictly observing time allotments, take Practice Test 3, beginning on page 303. Take a very short break
after each hour of testing.
❑ 17. Check your answers and use the Score Range Approximator (pages 387-388) to get a very general score
range.
❑ 18. Analyze your Practice Test 3 answers by filling out the analysis charts on pages 363-365. Have a teacher,
tutor, or knowledgeable friend review your essay using the checklist included.
❑ 19. While referring to each item of Practice Test 3, study all of the answers and explanations that begin on
❑ 20. Again, selectively review Part I: Analysis of Exam Areas, beginning on page 9, and any other basic skills
or exam areas you feel are necessary.
❑ 21. Carefully read "Final Preparation" on page 453.
ix
SAT Study Guide Checklist
x
CliffsTestPrep The NEW SAT, 3rd Edition
PSAT/NMSQT Study Guide Checklist
❑ 1. Read the PSAT/NMSQT free Information Bulletin available from your high school counselor or the
College Board.
❑ 2. Familiarize yourself with the new PSAT/NMSQT by reading the General Description on page 393.
❑ 3. Review the test format, page 393.
❑ 4. Learn the techniques of the Successful Overall Approaches, pages 6-8.
❑ 5. Carefully read Part I: Analysis of Exam Areas, beginning on page 9.
❑ 6. Review the SAT Critical Reading section, page 11.
❑ 7. Review the SAT Math section, page 39.
❑ 8. Review the Writing Skills Multiple Choice section, page 101.
❑ 9. Strictly observing time allotments, take the practice PSAT/NMSQT starting on page 397.
❑ 10. Review the answers and explanations for each question on page 435.
❑ 11. Analyze your practice test by filling out the analysis charts, pages 433-434.
❑ 12. Use the PSAT/NMSQT Score Range Approximator (pages 449-450) to get a very general score range.
❑ 13. Review your math skills as necessary.
❑ 14. Review the list of prefixes, suffixes, and roots starting on page 37.
❑ 15. If you have time for extra practice, work the problems on Practice Test 1 (page 133).
❑ 16. Review the answers and explanations for each question on page 191.
❑ 17. Analyze your Practice Test 1 answers by filling out the analysis charts, pages 189-191.
❑ 18. For additional practice, work as many of the additional practice tests as you want.
❑ 19. Be sure to review your answers and explanations for each test.
❑ 20. Carefully read "Final Preparation" on page 453.
Introduction
General Format of the New SAT
Section 1 Writing-Essay 1 Question
25 Minutes Writing-Essay 1 Essay Question
Section 2 Critical Reading 24-28 Questions
25 Minutes Sentence Completions 8-1 0 Questions
Short Reading Passages 4-6 Questions
Long Reading Passages 1 2-1 4 Questions
Section 3 Mathematics 20 Questions
25 Minutes Multiple Choice 20 Questions
Section 4 Writing-Multiple Choice 33-37 Questions
25 Minutes Improving Sentences 7-1 3 Questions
Identifying Sentence Errors 1 5-1 9 Questions
Improving Paragraphs 6-1 0 Questions
Section 5 Critical Reading 24-27 Questions
25 Minutes Sentence Completions 5-9 Questions
Short Reading Passages 4-6 Questions
Long Reading Passages 1 0-1 2 Questions
Section 6 Mathematics 20 Questions
25 Minutes Multiple Choice 1 0 Questions
Grid-ins 1 0 Questions
Section 7 Critical Reading 1 5-20 Questions
20 Minutes Reading Passages 1 3-1 5 Questions
(possible sentence completions) (4-6)
Section 8 Mathematics 1 4-1 5 Questions
20 Minutes Multiple Choice 1 4-1 5 Questions
Section 9 Critical Reading, Math, Writing 20-35 Questions
25 Minutes 20-35 Questions
Section 10 Writing-Multiple Choice 1 4-1 5 Questions
1 0 Minutes Improving Sentences 1 4-1 5 Questions
Total Testing Time: Approximately 225 Minutes = 3 Hours, 45 Minutes 202-21 2 Questions
CliffsTestPrep The NEW SAT, 3rd Edition
Note: The order in which the sections appear, the question types within a section, and the number of questions may
vary, and there may be many forms of the test. Only three of the critical reading sections (two 25-minute sections and
one 20-minute section) and three of the math sections (two 25-minute sections and one 20-minute section) and the writ-
ing essay (25 minutes) and multiple-choice sections (one 25-minute section and one 10-minute section) actually count
toward your new SAT score.
One 25-minute section is a pretest, or experimental, section that does not count toward your score. The pretest or exper-
imental section can be a critical reading, math, or writing multiple-choice section and can appear anywhere on your
exam. It does not have to be Section 9. You should work all of the sections as though they count toward your score.
General Description
The new SAT is used along with your high school record and other information to assess your competence for college
work. The test lasts 3 hours and 45 minutes and consists of mostly multiple-choice type questions, with some grid-in
questions, and an essay. The critical reading sections test your ability to read critically, to comprehend what you read,
and to understand words in context. The math sections test your ability to solve problems using mathematical reasoning
and your skills in arithmetic, algebra I and II, and geometry. The writing ability sections test your ability to write a
clear, precise essay and to find grammar and usage errors, to correct sentence errors, and to improve paragraphs.
A Close Look at the New SAT
Question Type Approximate Number of Questions
Critical Reading
Sentence Completions 1 9
Passage-Based Questions 48
Total Critical Reading Questions 67
Mathematics
Multiple Choice 44
Grid-Ins 1 0
Total Mathematics Questions 54
Writing-Multiple Choice
Improving Sentences 25
Identifying Sentence Errors 1 8
Improving Paragraphs 6
Total Writing Multiple Choice 49
Writing-Essay One Question
The problems in the math sections (multiple-choice and grid-ins) and the sentence completions section of the new SAT
are slightly graduated in difficulty. Many students make simple mistakes because they rush through the easy questions
to get to the difficult ones. Keep in mind that each question within a section is of equal value, so getting an easy ques-
tion right is worth the same as getting a difficult question right.
Comparing the "Older" SAT to the New SAT
Older SAT New SAT
Verbal Reasoning Critical Reading
Time: 75 minutes 70 minutes
(two 30-minute sections (two 25-minute sections
and one 1 5-minute section) and one 20-minute section)
Content: Sentence completion Sentence completion (Approx. 1 9 questions)
Analogies Short paragraph-length reading passages
Long reading comprehension Long reading passages
passages (Approx. total passage-based reading, long and short,
48 questions)
Mathematical Reasoning Mathematics
Time: 75 minutes 70 minutes
(two 30-minute sections and (two 25-minute sections and
one 1 5-minute section) one 20-minute section)
Content: Multiple-choice questions Multiple-choice questions (Approx. 44 questions)
Quantitative comparisons Grid-in questions (Approx. 1 0 questions)
Grid-in questions (will include some algebra II content)
Not on Test Writing
Time: N/A 25-minute essay
35-minute multiple choice (a 25-minute section
and a 1 0-minute section)
Content: N/A Essay: support a position, effectively communicate a viewpoint
Multiple-Choice questions (Approx. 49)
Improving sentences (Approx. 1 8 questions)
Identifying sentence errors (Approx. 25 questions)
Improving paragraphs (Approx. 6 questions)
Subscores: Essay 2-1 2
Multiple choice 20-80
Introduction
Special Notes for the New SAT
■ Verbal analogies are no longer on the exam.
■ Quantitative comparison math questions are no longer on the exam.
■ Critical reading sections now also include paragraph-length passages.
■ Math sections have been enhanced, including some algebra II problems.
■ The first part of the test will always be an essay.
■ Writing multiple-choice sections have been added.
Questions Commonly Asked about the New SAT
Q: WHO ADMINISTERS THE NEW SAT?
A: The new SAT is part of the entire Admissions Testing Program (ATP), which is administered by the College
Entrance Examination Board in conjunction with Educational Testing Service of Princeton, New Jersey.
Q: HOW IS THE NEW SAT DIFFERENT FROM THE "OLDER VERSION" SAT?
A: Starting in March 2005, the format and content areas of the SAT will be new. Basically, there will be three types of
sections, Critical Reading, Mathematics, and Writing (multiple choice and essay). Verbal analogies and math quanti-
tative comparisons will be eliminated. Some algebra II questions will be added to the math, while paragraph-length
reading passages will be added to the Critical Reading. The new sections are the written essay and the multiple-
choice writing skills. For a complete comparison of the tests see page 3, "Comparing the "Older" SAT to the
New SAT."
Q: HOW IS THE NEW SAT SCORED?
A: The scoring will be as follows:
Critical Reading: 200-800
Mathematics: 200-800
Writing: 200-800 (sub-scores essay 2-12, multiple choice 20-80)
Total possible score: 600-2400
Q: WILL THE NEW SAT BE MORE DIFFICULT?
A: No. The new SAT has been designed so that a student who could score a 500 on the math section of the old SAT I
could score a 500 on the math section of the new SAT. This is the same for the Critical Reading, formerly called
Verbal Reasoning.
Q: IS THERE A DIFFERENCE BETWEEN THE NEW SAT AND THE SAT II?
A: Yes. The new SAT assesses general critical reading, mathematical reasoning, writing, and editing abilities that you
have developed over your lifetime. The SAT II measures your proficiency in specific subject areas. The SAT II tests
how well you have mastered a variety of high school subjects.
Q: CAN I TAKE THE NEW SAT MORE THAN ONCE?
A: Yes. On past score reports, scores up to five years old were also included on the report. It is not uncommon for stu-
dents to take the test more than once.
Q: WHAT MATERIALS MAY I BRING TO THE NEW SAT?
A: Bring your registration form, positive identification, a watch, three or four sharpened no. 2 pencils, a good eraser,
and an approved calculator. You may not bring scratch paper or books. You may do your figuring in the margins of
the test booklet or in the space provided.
CliffsTestPrep The NEW SAT, 3rd Edition
Q: IF NECESSARY, MAY I CANCEL MY SCORE?
A: Yes. You may cancel your score on the day of the test by telling the test center supervisor, or you may write, fax,
or e-mail a cancellation to College Board ATP. See specific instructions for canceling your score in the Student
Bulletin. Your score report will record your cancellation, along with any completed test scores.
Q: SHOULD I GUESS ON THE NEW SAT?
A: If you can eliminate one or more of the multiple-choice answers to a question, it is to your advantage to guess.
Eliminating one or more answers increases your chance of choosing the right answer. To discourage wild guessing,
a fraction of a point is subtracted for every wrong answer, but no points are subtracted if you leave the answer
blank. On the grid-in questions, there is no penalty for filling in a wrong answer.
Q: HOW SHOULD I PREPARE FOR THE NEW TEST?
A: Understanding and practicing test-taking strategies helps a great deal, especially on the critical reading sections.
Subject-matter review is particularly useful for the math section, and a review of basic grammar and usage will be
helpful on the writing sections. Reviewing the writing process and practicing timed essay writing will also be help-
ful. The College Board offers additional practice online.
Q: WHEN WILL THE FIRST NEW SAT BE ADMINISTERED AND HOW OFTEN ARE THE TESTS
ADMINISTERED?
A: The new SAT will be administered for the first time in March 2005. The test is usually scheduled to be adminis-
tered nationwide seven times during the school year, in October, November, December, January, March, May, and
June. Some special administrations are given in limited locations.
Q: WHERE IS THE SAT ADMINISTERED?
A: Your local college testing or placement office will have information about local administrations; ask for the Student
Bulletin. The SAT is administered at hundreds of schools in and out of the United States.
Q: HOW AND WHEN SHOULD I REGISTER?
A: A registration packet, complete with return envelope, is attached to the Student Bulletin. Mailing in these forms,
plus the appropriate fees, completes the registration process. You can also register online at www.collegeboard.org.
You should register about six weeks prior to the exam date.
Q: IS W ALK-IN REGISTRATION PROVIDED?
A: Yes, on a limited basis. If you are unable to meet regular registration deadlines, you may attempt to register on the
day of the test. (An additional fee is required.) You will be admitted only if space remains after preregistered stu-
dents have been seated.
Q: CAN I GET MORE INFORMATION?
A: Yes. If you require information that is not available in this book, you can check online at www.collegeboard.org.
You can also write or call one of these College Board regional offices.
Middle States: 3440 Market Street, Suite 410, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania 19104-3338. (215) 387-7600.
or
New England: 470 Totten Pond Road, Waltham, Massachusetts 02451-1982. (781) 890-9150.
South: 100 Crescent Centre Parkway, Suite 340, Tucker, Georgia 30084-7039. (770) 908-9737.
or
HighPoint Center, Suite 900, 106 East College Avenue, Tallahassee, Florida 32301-7732.
Introduction
Southwest: 4330 South MoPac Expressway, Suite 200, Austin, Texas 78735. (512) 891-8400.
or
Capitol Place, 915 L Street, Suite 1200, Sacramento, California 95814. (916) 444-6262.
Taking the New SAT: Successful Overall Approaches
for Multiple-Choice Questions
I. The "Plus-Minus" System
Many who take the new SAT won't get their best possible score because they spend too much time on difficult ques-
tions, leaving insufficient time to answer the easy questions. Don't let this happen to you. Because every question
within each section is worth the same amount, use the following system, marking on your answer sheet:
1. Answer easy questions immediately.
2. Place a "+" next to any problem that seems solvable but is too time-consuming.
3. Place a "-" next to any problem that seems impossible.
Act quickly; don't waste time deciding whether a problem is a "+" or a "-."
After working all the problems you can do immediately, go back and work your "+" problems. If you finish them, try
your "-" problems (sometimes when you come back to a problem that seemed impossible, you suddenly realize how to
solve it).
Your answer sheet should look something like this after you finish working your easy questions:
Make sure to erase your "+" and "-" marks before your time is up.The scoring machine may count extraneous
marks as wrong answers.
II. The Elimination Strategy
Take advantage of being allowed to mark in your testing booklet. As you eliminate an answer choice from considera-
tion, make sure to mark it out in your question booklet as follows:
Notice that some choices are marked with question marks, signifying that they may be possible answers. This technique
helps you avoid reconsidering those choices you have already eliminated and helps you narrow down your possible
answers. These marks in your testing booklet do not need to be erased.
? (E)
(A)
? (B)
(C)
(D)
+ 5.
+ 2.
A EDCB
A EDCB
A EDCB
A EDCB
A EDCB
CliffsTestPrep The NEW SAT, 3rd Edition
III. The "Avoiding Misreads" Method
Sometimes a question may have different answers depending upon what is asked. For example,
If 6y + 3x = 14, what is the value of y?
The question may instead have asked, "What is the value of x?"
Or If 3 x + x = 20, what is the value of x + 2?
Notice that this question doesn't ask for the value of x, but rather the value of x + 2.
Or All of the following statements are true EXCEPT . . .
Or Which of the expressions used in the first paragraph does NOT help develop the main idea?
Notice that the words EXCEPT and NOT change these questions significantly.
To avoid "misreading" a question (and, therefore, answering it incorrectly), simply circle what you must answer in the
question. For example, do you have to find x or x + 2? Are you looking for what is true or the exception to what is true?
To help you avoid misreads, mark the questions in your test booklet in this way:
If 6y + 3x = 14, what is the value of y ?
If 3x + x = 20, what is the value of x + 2 ?
All of the following statements are true EXCEPT . . .
Which of the expressions used in the first paragraph does NOT help develop the main idea ?
And, once again, these circles in your question booklet do not have to be erased.
IV. The Multiple-Multiple-Choice Technique
Some math and verbal questions use a "multiple-multiple-choice" format. At first glance, these questions appear more
confusing and more difficult than normal five-choice (A, B, C, D, E) multiple-choice problems. Actually, once you
understand "multiple-multiple-choice" problem types and technique, they are often easier than a comparable standard
multiple-choice question. For example,
If x is a positive integer, then which of the following must be true?
I. x > 0
II. x = 0
III. x < 1
A. I only
B. II only
C. III only
D. I and II only
E. I and III only
Because x is a positive integer, it must be a counting number. Note that possible values of x could be 1, or 2, or 3, or 4,
and so on. Therefore, statement I, x > 0, is always true. So next to I on your question booklet, place a T for true.
TI . x > 0
II. x = 0
III. x < 1
Introduction
Now realize that the correct final answer choice (A, B, C, D, or E) must contain true statement I. This eliminates B and
C as possible correct answer choices, because they do not contain true statement I. You should cross out B and C on
your question booklet.
Statement II is incorrect. If x is positive, x cannot equal zero. Thus, next to II, you should place an F for false.
TI . x > 0
F II. x = 0
III. x < 1
Knowing that II is false allows you to eliminate any answer choices that contain false statement II. Therefore, you
should cross out D, because it contains false statement II. Only A and E are left as possible correct answers. Finally,
you realize that statement III is also false, as x must be 1 or greater. So you place an F next to III, thus eliminating
choice E and leaving A, I only. This technique often saves some precious time and allows you to take a better educated
guess should you not be able to complete all parts (I, II, III) of a multiple-multiple-choice question.
A Summary of General Strategies
■ Set a goal. Remember that an average score is about 50 percent right.
■ Know the directions.
■ Go into each section looking for the questions you can do and should get right.
■ Don't get stuck on any one question.
■ Be sure to mark your answers in the right place.
■ Be careful. Watch out for careless mistakes.
■ Don't make simple mistakes by rushing through the easy questions in math to get to the difficult ones.
■ Know when to skip a question.
■ Guess only if you can eliminate one or more answers.
■ Don't be afraid to fill in your answer or guess on grid-ins.
■ Practice using the "Plus-Minus" System, the Elimination Strategy, the "Avoiding Misreads" Method, and the
Multiple-Multiple-Choice Technique.
■ Remember to erase any extra marks on your answer sheet.
CliffsTestPrep The NEW SAT, 3rd Edition
ANALANALYYSSIIS OS O F F
EXEX AM ARAM AR EAEASS
PART I
Introduction to the Critical Reading Section
The Critical Reading sections (formerly called "verbal reasoning" sections) of the new SAT consist of two basic types
of questions: sentence completions and critical reading (short and long passages).
Two Critical Reading sections are 25 minutes in length and one is 20 minutes in length. Since one section of the test is
experimental (although you won't know which one), you could have an additional Critical Reading section.
Although the order of the sections and the number of questions may change, at this time the three sections total about
65 to 70 questions that count toward your score. These three sections generate a scaled critical reading score that ranges
from 200 to 800. About 50% right should generate an average score.
The sentence completion questions are generally arranged in a slight graduation of difficulty from easier to more difficult.
Basically, the first few questions are the easiest; the middle few are of average difficulty; and the last few are difficult.
There is no such pattern for the critical reading passages or questions.
Sentence Completion
You will have approximately 19 total sentence completions spread through the critical reading sections of the exam. In
each section, the sentence completions will basically be arranged in order from easy to difficult.
Ability Tested
This question type tests your ability to complete sentences with a word or words that retain the meaning of the sentence
and are structurally and stylistically correct.
Basic Skills Necessary
Good reading comprehension skills help in this section, as does a good twelfth-grade vocabulary. Some vocabulary
building books can be helpful, although the best way to build a vocabulary is to read, read, read.
Directions
Each blank in the following sentences indicates that something has been omitted. Consider the lettered words beneath
the sentence and choose the word or set of words that best fits the whole sentence.
Analysis of Directions
1. Note that you must choose the best word or words.
2. In cases where several choices might fit, select the one that fits the meaning of the sentence most precisely.
3. If the sentence contains two blanks, remember that both of the words corresponding to your choice must fit.
Suggested Approaches with Samples
Think of Words You Would Insert as the Answer
After reading the sentence and before looking at the answer choices, think of words you would insert and look for
synonyms of them.
Part I: Analysis of Exam Areas
Samples
How would you fill in the blank? Maybe with the word given or donated? Now look at the choices
and find a synonym for given or donated.
A. attracted
B. forwarded
C. contributed
D. ascribed
E. channeled
Contributed is the nearest synonym of given or donated and makes good sense in the sentence. The best choice is C.
A. retrospect . . . influenced
B. effect . . . modified
C. fact . . . unchanged
D. foresight . . . endangered
E. time . . . engendered
After reading the sentence, you may decide that the phrase not apparent at the time would suggest looking back for the
first blank and that the second word needs to be affected. You could read the sentence "Although it was not apparent at
the time, in looking back we can see how Miles Davis's performances in the 1970s were affected by what was happen-
ing then in popular music." Now, looking for synonyms for looking back and affected gives you choice A, retrospect . . .
influenced. The best choice is A.
Look for Signal Words Connecting Contrasting Ideas
Some signal words, such as however, although, on the other hand, but, instead, despite, regardless, rather than,
and except, connect contrasting ideas.
Samples
of firearms?
A. redoubles
B. advances
C. inverts
D. impedes
E. amplifies
The clue here is rather than encourages. You need a verb whose object is proliferation and that means the opposite of
encourages. The best choice is impedes, which means obstructs or retards. To invert is to turn upside down. The best
choice is D.
A. all . . . debt
B. whatever . . . liability
C. everything . . . surplus
D. every cent . . . deficit
E. nothing . . . war chest
But signals that the first half of the sentence contrasts with the second half. The fact that most candidates spend every-
thing (and end up with nothing) contrasts with those who end up with a surplus. The best choice is C.
its plot and characterizations.
A. expanded
B. established
C. augmented
D. declined
E. tempered
But signals that you need a verb denoting something different from the enthusiasm of the first part of the sentence.
Choices A, B, and C contradict but. The verb tempered (moderated, reduced in intensity) is both more suitable in mean-
ing and more idiomatic than D. The best choice is E.
Notice Signal Words Connecting Similar Ideas
Other signal words, such as in other words, besides, and, in addition, also, therefore, furthermore, and as, often
connect similar ideas.
Samples
1. We need experiments to discover whether the systems that we have designed that work in theory also work in
A. hypotheses
B. fact
C. space
D. part
E. essence
The key words here are in other words, which tell you that your choice must be similar to the real world. The terms in
fact and in the real world both refer to similar ideas in this sentence. The best choice is B.
Introduction to the Critical Reading Section
2. This treatise is concerned only with the process unique to the period in question; therefore, no attempt has been
A. include . . . unrelated
B. omit . . . irrelevant
C. re-create . . . germane
D. discuss . . . essential
E. evaluate . . . pertinent
The words in the first half of the sentence that are especially related to those to be filled in in the second half are is con-
cerned only and unique to the period. The verb in the first blank is parallel to is concerned and describes the contents.
Choices A, include, D, discuss, and possibly E, evaluate, are possible. The second blank needs an adjective that will
make the phrase to that era parallel to unique to the period. Choice B, irrelevant, would work, but only A has the cor-
rect first word. The best choice is A.
Focus on Signal Words that Help Define Other Words
Some words or phrases will actually give you a definition or point you to the definition of the word needed.
Samples
edges, each with a different use.
A. ancient
B. primitive
C. ferrous
D. versatile
E. reliable
The tools the sentence describes have several edges and several uses, and the missing adjective should fit these conditions.
Versatilemeans capable of many things. The best choice is D.
A. contradictory
B. realistic
C. simplistic
D. timeless
E. unchanging
The second part of this sentence, both wholly recognizable and unfamiliar, is a perfect example of the word needed,
contradictory. The words recognizable and unfamiliar contradict each other (are opposites). The best choice is A.
Part I: Analysis of Exam Areas
Watch for Contrasts between Positive and Negative
As you read the sentence, watch for contrasts between positive and negative words. Look for words like not, never,
and no.
Samples
people.
The first blank is obviously a negative word, something that a good person would not shout; the second
blank is a positive word, something that a good person would respect. Here are the choices:
A. obscenities . . . feelings
B. loudly . . . comfort
C. anywhere . . . presence
D. blessings . . . cynicism
E. insults . . . threat
Choice B is neutral-positive; C is neutral-neutral; D is positive-negative; E is negative-negative. Only choice A offers a
negative-positive pair of words. The best choice is A.
A. resistance
B. experience
C. coherence
D. verbosity
E. flexibility
The correct answer must describe a praiseworthy quality opposite to obstinacy. Although B and C are good qualities,
only flexibility, E, means pliancy, the quality of being flexible. The best choice is E.
Be Aware of the Direction of the Sentence
Negative words can change the direction of the sentence, sometimes making the logic of the sentence more
difficult to follow.
Samples
A. considered . . . trepidation
B. circumstantial . . . valor
C. intentional . . . reluctance
D. deliberate . . . courage
E. fortuitous . . . ardor
Introduction to the Critical Reading Section
The adjective must be the opposite of accidental. The better choices are the synonyms of A, C, and D-considered,
intentional, and deliberate. Choices B and E do not fit this context. The second blank requires a noun that is like
steadfastness or describes a sterling quality. Choice A, trepidation, means fear or hesitancy, and choice C, reluctance,
means unwillingness. Neither will do, but choice D, courage, is what is needed. The best choice is D.
A. bright . . . torn
B. old . . . clean
C. faded . . . frayed
D. new . . .mangled
E. tattered . . . original
The logic of this sentence could be difficult to follow because of the negative wording. State of disrepair tips you off
that both blanks must be filled with negative words. Choice C, faded . . . frayed, is the only negative pair. The words
also fit the meaning of the sentence. The best choice is C.
Attempt Questions One Word at a Time
Questions with two words missing should be attempted one word at a time.
Samples
A. encouraging . . . sizeable
B. convincing . . . minute
C. alarming . . . negligible
D. optimistic . . . huge
E. dire . . . drastic
Notice that trying the first word will help you eliminate answer choices A, B, and D. If the predictions are of decreasing
funds and frightening to lawmakers, the first adjective must be either alarming, C, or dire, E, (fearful, dreadful). Now
try the second choice to get the correct answer. Since the lawmakers have been scared into action, you can infer that the
reductions are drastic, E, rather than negligible, C. The best choice is E.
A. implies . . .dilating
B. anticipates . . . privatizing
C. infers . . . acquiring
D. requires . . . living
E. contends . . . siphoning
The only first words that make sense in the sentence are choices A, implies, B, anticipates, and E, contends. But the
second word in choice E, siphoning, is the only one that fits. "Siphoning off profits" is a common phrase and is some-
thing that unscrupulous business owners might try to do. The best choice is E.
Part I: Analysis of Exam Areas
Work from the Second Blank First
Sometimes it is more efficient to work from the second blank first.
Samples
set by a 6-3 score.
A. surprised . . . failed
B. relieved . . . came back
C. puzzled . . . refused
D. alarmed . . . attempted
E. delighted . . . was unable
There are no clues here to tell you which of the first words describes the reaction of the parents. Any of the five might
work. But if you deal with the second blank first, you can see that the word despite makes it clear that Sally must win
the set. Choice B, came back, looks like the best choice, although D is possible. That B is better is confirmed by the
first word, as relieved is better than alarmed. The best answer is B.
A. profit . . . and more
B. paperwork . . . or less
C. duplication . . . effective
D. bosses . . . wasteful
E. competitors . . . aggressive
The second blank is something that is provided. Chances are that the something provided is a positive word, and effec-
tive seems like a good choice. Reading choice C into the sentence, you will find that it makes good sense and is stylisti-
cally and structurally correct. The best choice is C.
Read in Each Choice
If you don't spot any signal words or you don't know the meaning of some of the choices (or if you're just stumped),
quickly read each answer choice in and see which sounds best. Sometimes this last method will help you at least
eliminate some of the choices so that you can take an educated guess.
Samples
A. junction . . . desiccated
B. confluence . . . irrigated
C. bank . . . drained
D. source . . . submerged
E. end . . . inundated
Introduction to the Critical Reading Section
The first word probably refers to the place where the rivers are close, since the fields are watered by both. Except for C,
any of the four nouns is possible. Confluence means a flowing together, the place where two waterways come together.
The past participle must refer to the watering of these fertile lands. So desiccated (dried up) or drained can be elimi-
nated. If the fields are productive, irrigated (supplied with water) makes better sense than inundated or submerged,
which suggest destructive flooding. The best choice is B.
public that juries will finally be willing to convict the corporations when the cases go to trial.
A. advertising . . . disseminated
B. propaganda . . . credited
C. repute . . . queried
D. mendacity . . . queried
E. guilt . . . acknowledged
If you quickly read each choice into the sentence, you'll notice that some of the choices just don't seem to make sense,
sound right, or fit. Since the last part of the sentence says willing to convict the corporations when the cases go to trial,
the idea that the guilt is acknowledged sounds good and fits perfectly. The best choice is E.
A special reminder: Always read your answer into the sentence to make sure that it makes sense. This will often
help you avoid oversights or simple mistakes.
A Summary of Strategies for
Sentence Completion Questions
■ After reading the sentence and before looking at the choices, think of words you would insert and look for
synonyms of them.
■ Look for signal words like however, although, and but that connect contrasting ideas.
■ Look for signal words like and, in other words, and therefore that often connect similar ideas.
■ Focus on signal words or phrases that help define or lead to definitions of missing words.
■ Watch for contrasts between positive and negative words.
■ Negative words can change the direction of the sentence, sometimes making the logic of the sentence
difficult to follow.
■ Questions with two words missing should be attempted one word at a time.
■ Sometimes it is more efficient to work from the second blank first.
■ If you're stumped, quickly read each answer choice into the sentence and see which sounds best.
■ Always read your answer into the sentence to make sure that it makes sense.
Part I: Analysis of Exam Areas
Critical Reading Passages (Short and Long)
Remember, there are three Critical Reading sections that count toward your score-two 25-minute sections and one 20-
minute section. These sections will include short paragraph-length critical reading passages, longer reading comprehen-
sion passages, and/or paired passages or related passages. The short paragraph-length critical reading passages are new
to the SAT. The reading passages and the questions following the reading passages are NOT in order of difficulty.
Ability Tested
This section tests your ability to understand, interpret, and analyze reading passages on a variety of topics. The passages
on each exam will come from four content areas: humanities, social sciences, natural sciences, and narrative (fiction or
nonfiction).
The common types of questions are those that ask you
■ about the meaning of a word or phrase in the passage.
■ about the main idea, main point, purpose, or even a possible title of the passage.
■ about information that is directly stated in the passage.
■ about information that is assumed, implied, suggested, or can be inferred.
■ to recognize applications of the author's opinions or ideas.
■ to evaluate how the author develops and presents the passage.
■ to recognize the style or tone of the passage.
Basic Skills Necessary
Students who have read widely and know how to read and mark a passage actively and efficiently tend to do well on
this section.
Directions
Questions follow each of the passages below. Using only the stated or implied information in each passage and in its
introduction, if any, answer the questions.
Analysis of Directions
1. Answer all the questions for one passage before moving on to the next one. If you don't know the answer, take an
educated guess or skip it.
2. If there is an introduction to the passage, read it carefully. It may be helpful in answering the questions.
3. Use only the information given or implied in a passage. Do not consider outside information, even if it seems
more accurate than the given information.
Suggested Approaches with Sample Passages
General Strategies
■ Read Actively.Read the passage actively, marking main points and other items you feel are important such as
conclusions, names, definitions, places, and numbers. Make only a few such marks per paragraph. Remember,
these marks are to help you understand the passage.
Introduction to the Critical Reading Section
■ Preread a few questions. You may want to skim a few questions first, marking words that give you a clue about
what to look for when you read the passage. This method, called prereading questions, can be especially helpful
on unfamiliar passages. Try it on a variety of passages to see how it works for you.
■ Pace yourself. Don't get stuck on the passage or on any one question. If you have difficulty with one question,
either take an educated guess by eliminating some choices or leave it blank and return to it briefly before you
read the next passage (if there is more than one passage).
■ Answers are from information given or implied.Base your answer on what you read in the passage, the introduc-
tion to the passage, or footnotes given following the passage. The passage must support your answer. All questions
can and should be answered from information given or implied in the passage.
■ Be sure to answer the question. Some good or true answers are not correct. Make sure that the answer you select
is what the question is asking for according to the passage.
■ Read all choices. Be sure to read all of the choices to make sure that you have the best of the ones given. Some
other choices may be good, but you're looking for the best.
■ Avoid the attractive distractor. Watch out for "attractive distractors," that is, answers that look good, but aren't
the best answer. These attractive distractors are usually the most common wrong answers. They are answers that
are carefully written to be close to the best answer. When you narrow your choice down to two answers, one is
probably the attractive distractor. If you are down to two answers, reading the question again can help you find
the best one.
■ Eliminate. Use an elimination strategy. If you know an answer is incorrect, mark it out immediately in your ques-
tion booklet.
■ You can skip passages. When more than one reading passage is given, you may want to first read the passage
that is of more interest or familiarity to you and answer those questions before reading the next passage. But be
careful if you skip a passage to mark your answers in the proper place on your answer sheet.
Specific Strategies for Questions Based on Single Passages
■ Read the passage looking for its main point and its structure.
■ Make sure that your answer is supported by the passage.
■ As you read, note the tone of the passage.
■ Take advantage of the line numbers.
■ Use the context to figure out the meaning of the words, even if you're unfamiliar with them.
■ Read all the choices, since you're looking for the best answer given.
The Approaches
Read the passage actively, marking the main points and other items you feel are important.
Mark the Passage
You can mark a passage by underlining or circling important information. But be sure you don't overmark, or you'll
defeat the purpose of the technique. The following passage shows one way a test taker might mark a passage to
assist in understanding the information given and to quickly return to particular information in the passage when
necessary. You may find that circling works better for you or using other marks that you personally find helpful.
Part I: Analysis of Exam Areas
Introduction to the Critical Reading Section
Sample Long Reading Passage
Human beings have in recent years discovered that they may have succeeded in achieving a momentous but
rather unwanted accomplishment. Because of our numbers and our technology, it now seems likely that we have
begun altering the climate of our planet.
Climatologists are confident that over the past century, the global average temperature has increased about half
a degree Celsius. This warming is thought to be at least partly the result of human activity, such as the burning of
fossil fuels in power plants and automobiles. Moreover, because populations, national economies, and the use of
technology are all growing, the global average temperature is expected to continue increasing, by an additional 1.0
to 3.5 degrees C by the year 2100.
Such warming is just one of the many consequences that climate change can have. Nevertheless, the ways that
warming might affect the planet's environment-and, therefore, its life-are among the most compelling issues in
earth science. Unfortunately, they are also among the most difficult to predict. The effects will be complex and vary
considerably from place to place. Of particular interest are the changes in regional climate and local weather and
especially extreme events-record temperatures, heat waves, very heavy rainfall, or drought, for example-which
could very well have staggering effects on societies, agriculture, and ecosystems.
Based on studies of how the earth's weather has changed over the past century as global temperatures edged up-
ward as well as on sophisticated computer models of climate, it now seems probable that warming will accompany
changes in regional weather. For example, longer and more intense heat waves-a likely consequence of an in-
crease in either the mean temperature or in the variability of daily temperatures-would result in public health
threats and even unprecedented levels of mortality, as well as in such costly incon veniences as road buckling and
high cooling loads, the latter possibly leading to electrical brownouts or blackouts.
Climate change would also affect the patterns of rainfall and other precipitation, with some areas getting more
and others less, changing global patterns and occurrences of droughts and floods. Similarly, increased variability and
extremes in precipitation can exacerbate existing problems in water quality and sewage treatment and in erosion and
urban storm-water routing, among others. Such possibilities underscore the need to understandthe consequences of
humankind's effect on global climate.
Researchers have tw o main-and complementary-methods of in vestigating these climate changes. Detailed
meteorological records go back about a century, which coincides with the period during which the global average
temperature increased by half a degree. By examining these measurements and records, climatologists are begin-
ning to get a picture of how and where extremes of weather and climate have occurred.
It is the relation between these extremes and the overall temperature increasethat really interests scientists. This is
where another critical research tool-global ocean-atmosphere climate models-comes in. These high-performance
computer programs simulate the important processes of the atmosphere and oceans, giving researchers insights into
the links between human activities and major weather and climate events.
The combustion of fossil fuels, for example, increases the concentration in the atmosphere of certain green -
house gases, the fundamental agents of the global warming that may be attributable to humans. These gases, which
include carbon dioxide, methane, ozone, halocarbons, and nitrous oxide, let in sunlight but tend to insulate the
planet against the loss of heat, not unlik e the glass of a greenhouse . Thus a higher concentration means a warmer
climate.
Preread a Few Questions
Prereading can give you a clue about the passage and what to look for. Quickly reading a few of the questions before
reading the passage may be very helpful, especially if the passage seems difficult or unfamiliar to you. In prereading,
read only the questions and NOT the answer choices (which aren't included in the following examples). Notice that you
should mark (underline or circle) what the question is asking. After you read the passage, you'll go on to read the ques-
tions again and each of their answer choices. The following questions give examples of ways to mark as you preread.
1. Which of the following would be the best title for this passage?
Notice that best title is marked. This is a main-point question and tips you off that you should be sure to read for the
main point in the passage.
Part I: Analysis of Exam Areas
2. Which of the following inferences is NOT supported by information in the passage?
Notice that inferences. . . NOT supported is marked. To answer this question, you'll need to draw information from the
passage by "reading between the lines."
3. According to the passage, which of the following terms best describes the effects of global warming?
Notice that best describes . . . effects of global warming is marked. You now know that the passage involves the effects
of global warming.
4. Which of the following best describes the author's tone in this passage?
The words author's tone are marked here. You now know to pay special attention to the tone of the passage.
After such prereading and marking of the questions, you should go back and read the passage actively. The passage is
reprinted here without the marking. Try marking it yourself this time before you go on to the sample questions that follow.
Questions 1-8 are based on the following reading passage.
Human beings have in recent years discovered that they may have succeeded in achieving a momentous but
rather unwanted accomplishment. Because of our numbers and our technology, it now seems likely that we have
begun altering the climate of our planet.
Climatologists are confident that over the past century, the global average temperature has increased about half
a degree Celsius. This warming is thought to be at least partly the result of human activity, such as the burning of
fossil fuels in power plants and automobiles. Moreover, because populations, national economies, and the use of
technology are all growing, the global average temperature is expected to continue increasing, by an additional 1.0
to 3.5 degrees C by the year 2100.
Such warming is just one of the many consequences that climate change can have. Nevertheless, the ways that
warming might affect the planet's environment-and, therefore, its life-are among the most compelling issues in
earth science. Unfortunately, they are also among the most difficult to predict. The effects will be complex and vary
considerably from place to place. Of particular interest are the changes in regional climate and local weather and
especially extreme events-record temperatures, heat waves, very heavy rainfall, or drought, for example-which
could very well have staggering effects on societies, agriculture, and ecosystems.
Based on studies of how the earth's weather has changed over the past century as global temperatures edged up-
ward as well as on sophisticated computer models of climate, it now seems probable that warming will accompany
changes in regional weather. For example, longer and more intense heat waves-a likely consequence of an in-
crease in either the mean temperature or in the variability of daily temperatures-would result in public health
threats and even unprecedented levels of mortality, as well as in such costly inconveniences as road buckling and
high cooling loads, the latter possibly leading to electrical brownouts or blackouts.
Climate change would also affect the patterns of rainfall and other precipitation, with some areas getting more
and others less, changing global patterns and occurrences of droughts and floods. Similarly, increased variability and
extremes in precipitation can exacerbate existing problems in water quality and sewage treatment and in erosion and
urban storm-water routing, among others. Such possibilities underscore the need to understand the consequences of
humankind's effect on global climate.
Researchers have two main-and complementary-methods of investigating these climate changes. Detailed
meteorological records go back about a century, which coincides with the period during which the global average
temperature increased by half a degree. By examining these measurements and records, climatologists are begin-
ning to get a picture of how and where extremes of weather and climate have occurred.
It is the relation between these extremes and the overall temperature increase that really interests scientists. This is
where another critical research tool-global ocean-atmosphere climate models-comes in. These high-performance
computer programs simulate the important processes of the atmosphere and oceans, giving researchers insights into
the links between human activities and major weather and climate events.
The combustion of fossil fuels, for example, increases the concentration in the atmosphere of certain green-
house gases, the fundamental agents of the global warming that may be attributable to humans. These gases, which
include carbon dioxide, methane, ozone, halocarbons, and nitrous oxide, let in sunlight but tend to insulate the
planet against the loss of heat, not unlike the glass of a greenhouse. Thus a higher concentration means a warmer
climate.
Introduction to the Critical Reading Section
Read the Passage Looking for Its Main Point and Structure
As you read the passage, try to focus on "what the author is really saying" or "what point the author is trying to
make." There are many ways to ask about the main point of a passage.
1. Which of the following would be the best title for this passage?
A. The History of Climate
B. Fossil Fuels and Greenhouse Gases
C. Extremes of Climate
D. Global Warming and the Changing Climate
E. Methods of Researching Global Climate
Asking for the best title is a main-point, or main-idea, type question. Now take a careful look at each answer choice.
Choice A is too broad; also, the passage doesn't actually deal with the history of climate. Choices B, C, and E, on the
other hand, are too narrow. While it's true that all of these topics are touched upon in the passage, a title should cover
the passage as a whole. The best choice is D.
Make Sure that Your Answer Is Supported by the Passage
Every single correct answer is in the passage or can be directly inferred from the passage.
2. Which of the following inferences is NOT supported by information in the passage?
A. Computer models of climate have proved superior to old meteorological records in helping climatologists
pinpoint changes.
B. Changes in climate are affected by both natural and human activities.
C. Whatever the changes that occur in North America's climate over the next two hundred years, it is unlikely
they will be accompanied by cooler average temperatures.
D. Dramatic changes in precipitation could have negative effects, producing both droughts and floods.
E. Increased industrialization in developing countries could lead to increases in the rate of global warming.
This is a tricky question, since it asks you which of the answer choices is NOT supported by the passage. The author
mentions two ways of researching climate changes but describes them as complementary, not as superior or inferior.
Therefore, choice A is not supported by the passage. You might be tempted by choice B, but notice that line 5 states that
warming is thought to be at least partly the result of human activity, suggesting that natural forces are involved as well.
Choice C is supported in lines 15-20, choice D in lines 21-22, and choice E in lines 6-8. The best choice is A.
Make Sure that the Answer You Select "Answers the Question"
Some good or true answers are not correct. Even though more than one choice may be true, you're looking for the
best answer to the questions given.
Part I: Analysis of Exam Areas
3. According to the passage, which of the following terms best describes the effects of global warming?
A. Complex
B. Disastrous
C. Predictable
D. Inconvenient
E. Inconsequential
Although it's true that some effects will cause inconvenience, making choice D a possible answer, the passage indicates
that more far-reaching effects are probable as well. Another possible answer is choice B, but according to the passage,
effects will vary from place to place; disastrous is too strong a word and not as accurate as choice A, complex (line 11).
Choice C can be eliminated, since the passage states that the effects can't be predicted easily (lines 9-11). Choice E is
also clearly incorrect; global warming will have significant effects (lines 13-14). The best choice is A.
As You Read, Note the Tone of the Passage
The words that the author uses to describe events, people, or places will help give you an understanding of what and
how the author wants you to feel or think. Pay careful attention to the types of words-are they emotional, calm,
positive, negative, subjective, or objective?
4. Which of the following best describes the author's tone in this passage?
A. Alarmist
B. Irate
C. Concerned
D. Accusatory
E. Indifferent
Although the author does mention some possible staggering effects, the tone is calm and concerned, not emotional as
in choice A. Nor is the tone irate, choice B, or accusatory, choice D; the author presents facts about fossil fuels' role in
global warming but doesn't place blame. Choice E is also incorrect; see, for example, lines 34-38, which clearly indi-
cate the author is not indifferent to the issue of humans' effect on global climate. The best choice is C.
Take Advantage of the Line Numbers
All passages have the lines numbered, which, in questions that mention specific line numbers, gives you the advan-
tage of being able to quickly spot where the information is located. After you spot the location, be sure to read the
line(s) before and after the lines mentioned. This nearby text can be very helpful in putting the information in the
proper context and answering the question.
5. The name "greenhouse gases," first mentioned in lines 34-35, is appropriate because these gases
A. are hot.
B. are produced in controlled circumstances.
C. filter the sun's harmful rays.
D. are highly concentrated.
E. prevent heat loss.
Although greenhouse gasesare first mentioned in lines 34-35, the answer to the question is actually found in lines 36-38.
You can eliminate choice B, even though it is true that a greenhouse is a controlled climate. Also, nothing in the passage
suggests that these gases are hot, choice A, or that they filter out harmful rays, choice C. Although it is true that the gases
can be highly concentrated, choice D, high concentration has nothing to do with the term greenhouse. The best choice is E.
Use the Context to Figure Out the Meaning of Words, Even if You're
Unfamiliar with Them
Some of the questions deal with "vocabulary in context," that is, with understanding the meaning of a word as it is
used in the passage. Even if you don't know the meaning of the word, the passage will give you good clues. You can
also read the sentence from the passage, leaving the word space blank, and plug in each choice to see which answer
choice makes sense in the sentence.
6. The best definition of "exacerbate" in line 23 is
A. worsen.
B. change.
C. cause.
D. complicate.
E. affect.
As it is used in this sentence, exacerbate means to aggravate or irritate (make worse). The passage describes the prob-
lems as already existing; therefore, choice C could not be correct. From context, it is also clear that choices B, D, and E
are too mild; none of them includes the concept of an existing problem (such as water quality) becoming worse because
of variable and extreme precipitation. In this case, a common meaning is the correct answer, but remember that the
common meaning of the word is not always the meaning used in the passage. The best choice is A.
Read All the Choices, Since You're Looking for the Best Answer Given
Best is a relative term; that is, determining what is best may mean choosing from degrees of good, better, or best.
Although you may have more than one good choice, you're looking for the best of those given. Remember, the answer
doesn't have to be perfect, just the best of those presented to you. So don't get stuck on one choice before you read
the rest.
7. According to the passage, scientists are most interested in the link between global warming and extreme
changes in regional climate because
A. such a link has never been made and cannot be easily explained.
B. establishing the link will prove their current theories about the causes of global warming.
C. it could help explain the effects of natural forces, such as gravitational pull, on climate.
D. finding it will solve the problem of global warming.
E. it could help pinpoint which human activities are involved in climate extremes.
It is possible that choices A and B are peripheral reasons for their interest, but not their main reason and, therefore, not
the best answer. Choice C is not the best answer because scientists are more interested in the effects of human activities
than those of natural forces on global warming. Even though it is a step toward a solution, understanding the link
wouldn't in itself solve the problem of global warming, thus eliminating choice D. Notice that some of the choices here
are possible, but choice E is the best because it is clearly supported in lines 31-33. The correct answer is E.
Introduction to the Critical Reading Section
Use an Elimination Strategy
Often you can arrive at the right answer by eliminating other answers. Watch for key words in the answer choices
to help you find the main point given in each choice. Notice that some incorrect choices are too general, too specific,
irrelevant, or off topic or that they contradict information given in the passage.
8. If true, which of the following would call into question current theories of global warming?
A. A dramatic increase in world precipitation
B. A dramatic decrease in world precipitation
C. An increase in the rate of global warming following the elimination of the use of fossil fuels
D. Below-normal temperature recordings in Canada for two years
E. The discovery that average global temperatures were lower 500 years ago than they are today
Since experts believe that the use of fossil fuels is partly responsible, one would expect the elimination of that use to
lead to a decrease, not an increase, in the rate of global warming. Both increases and decreases in precipitation are ex-
pected, and, therefore, choices A and B are incorrect and can be eliminated. Two years of decreased temperatures in a
particular area wouldn't disprove global warming; its effects vary considerably from place to place, according to the
passage; thus, choice D can be eliminated. Finally, you can eliminate choice E, since it would support the theory, not
call it into question. The best choice is C.
Another Sample Reading Passage
Questions 1-5 are based on the following passage.
Woodrow Wilson is usually ranked among the country's great presidents in spite of his failures to win Senate
approval of the League of Nations. Wilson had yearned for a political career all his life; he won his first office in
1910 when he was elected governor of New Jersey. Two years later he was elected president in one of the most
rapid political rises in our history. For a while Wilson had practiced law but found it both boring and unprofitable;
then he became a political scientist of great renown and finally president of Princeton University. He did an out-
standing job at Princeton but lost out in a battle with Dean Andrew West for control of the graduate school. When
he was asked by the Democratic boss of New Jersey, Jim Smith, to run for governor, Wilson readily accepted
because his position at Princeton was becoming untenable.
Until 1910 Wilson seemed to be a conservative Democrat in the Grover Cleveland tradition. He had denounced
Bryan in 1896 and had voted for the National Democratic candidate who supported gold. In fact, when the
Democratic machine first pushed Wilson's nomination in 1912, the young New Jersey progressives wanted no part
of him. Wilson later assured them that he would champion the progressive cause, and so they decided to work for
his election. It is easy to accuse Wilson of political expediency, but it is entirely possible that by 1912 he had changed
his views as had countless other Americans. While governor of New Jersey, he carried out his election pledges by
enacting an impressive list of reforms.
Wilson secured the Democratic nomination on the forty-sixth ballot after a fierce battle with Champ Clark of
Missouri and Oscar W. Underwood of Alabama. Clark actually had a majority of votes but was unable to attract the
necessary two-thirds. In the campaign, Wilson emerged as the middle-of-the-road candidate-between the conser-
vative William H. Taft and the more radical Theodore Roosevelt. Wilson called his program the New Freedom, which
he said was the restoration of free competition as it had existed before the growth of the trusts. In contrast,
Theodore Roosevelt was advocating a New Nationalism, which seemed to call for massive federal intervention in
the economic life of the nation. Wilson felt that the trusts should be destroyed, but he made a distinction between a
trust and a legitimately successful big business. Theodore Roosevelt, on the other hand, accepted the trusts as in-
evitable but said that the government should regulate them by establishing a new regulatory agency. The former
president also felt that a distinction should be made between the "good" trusts and the "bad" trusts.
Part I: Analysis of Exam Areas
Introduction to the Critical Reading Section
Always look for the main point of the passage.
1. The author's main purpose in writing this passage is to
A. argue that Wilson is one of the great U.S. presidents.
B. survey the differences between Wilson, Taft, and Roosevelt.
C. explain Wilson's concept of the New Freedom.
D. discuss some major events of Wilson's career.
E. suggest reasons that Wilson's presidency may have started World War I.
Remember that there are many ways to ask about the main point of a passage. What is the main idea? What is the best
title? What is the author's purpose? Choices A and E are irrelevant to the information in the passage, and choices B and
C mention secondary purposes rather than the primary one. The best choice is D.
Be aware of information not directly stated in the passage.
2. The author implies which of the following about the New Jersey progressives?
A. They did not support Wilson after he was governor.
B. They were not conservative Democrats.
C. They were more interested in political expediency.
D. Along with Wilson, they were supporters of Bryan in 1896.
E. They particularly admired Wilson's experience as president of Princeton University.
Read between the lines. Implied information can be valuable in understanding the passage and in answering some ques-
tions. In the second paragraph, Wilson's decision to champion the progressive cause after 1912 is contrasted with his
earlier career, when he seemed to be a conservative Democrat. Thus, it may be concluded that the progressives, whom
Wilson finally joined, were not conservative Democrats, as was Wilson earlier in his career. Choices A and D contradict
information in the paragraph, while choices C and E are not suggested by any information given in the passage. The
best choice is B.
Watch for important conclusions or information that supports a conclusion.
3. The passage supports which of the following conclusions about the progress of Wilson's political career?
A. Few politicians have progressed so rapidly toward the attainment of higher office.
B. Failures late in his career caused him to be regarded as a president who regressed instead of progressed.
C. Wilson encountered little opposition once he determined to seek the presidency.
D. The League of Nations marked the end of Wilson's reputation as a strong leader.
E. Wilson's political progress was aided by Champ Clark and Oscar Underwood.
This choice is explicitly supported by the third sentence in the first paragraph in which you are told that Wilson was
elected president in one of the most rapid political rises in our history.The best choice is A.
Part I: Analysis of Exam Areas
Understand the meaning and possible reason for using certain words or phrases.
4. At the end of the first paragraph in the phrase his position at Princeton was becoming untenable (line 8), the
meaning of untenable is which of the following?
A. Unlikely to last for ten years
B. Filled with considerably less tension
C. Difficult to maintain or continue
D. Filled with achievements that would appeal to voters
E. Something he did not have a tenacious desire to continue
Be alert to the positive and negative connotations of words and phrases in each passage, as well as in the questions
themselves. In the case of untenable, the prefix un- suggests that the word has a negative connotation. The context in
which the word occurs does as well. Wilson left his position at Princeton; therefore, you may conclude that the position
was somehow unappealing or something else was more appealing. Only two of the answer choices, C and E, provide a
negative definition. Although choice E may attract your attention because tenacious looks similar to tenable, the correct
choice is C, which, in this case, is the conventional definition of untenable. The best choice is C.
Eliminate those choices that are not supported by the passage.
5. According to the passage, which of the following was probably true about the presidential campaign of 1912?
A. Woodrow Wilson won the election by an overwhelming majority.
B. The inexperience of Theodore Roosevelt accounted for his radical position.
C. Wilson was unable to attract two-thirds of the votes but won anyway.
D. There were three nominated candidates for the presidency.
E. Wilson's New Freedom did not represent Democratic interests.
Your answer choice must be supported by information either stated or implied in the passage. Choices A, B, and C con-
tain information that is not addressed in the passage and can be eliminated as irrelevant. Choice E contradicts the fact
that Wilson was a Democratic candidate. The discussion of Taft and Roosevelt as the candidates who finally ran against
Wilson for the presidency supports choice D, which is the correct answer. The best choice is D.
Short Paragraph-Length Reading Passages
The new SAT now includes paragraph-length critical reading passages. These short passages, about 100 words in
length, are usually followed by two questions. All of the strategies for the longer reading comprehension passages also
apply here. As you attempt to answer the questions to the first passage, apply the strategies:
■ Read the passage looking for its main point and its structure.
■ Make sure that your answer is supported by the passage.
■ As you read, note the tone of the passage.
■ Take advantage of the line numbers.
■ Use the context to figure out the meaning of the words, even if you're unfamiliar with them.
■ Read all the choices, since you're looking for the best answer given.
Introduction to the Critical Reading Section
Samples
Questions 1-2 are based on the following passage.
Potatoes changed history, or rather, the lack of potatoes changed history. The Great Famine in Ireland
(1846-1849) was partly the result of a potato fungus that destroyed the major food source of the Irish and was par-
ticularly devastating to the poor. Food relief from the British was inadequate and came too late. Some estimates
place the number of deaths at 750,000, with an equal number of the Irish poor emigrating to Britain, Canada,
Australia, and the United States. British economic policy-including the policy of laissez faire, which argued against
state intervention-was partly responsible for the disaster. Among the other culprits were the nature of Irish land-
holdings, destructive farming methods, and a lack of agricultural diversity.
1. The first sentence of the paragraph can best be described as intended to
A. create interest.
B. mislead the reader.
C. provide facts.
D. promote a myth.
E. provide a humorous perspective.
Note that this question is asking for the intent of the first sentence. You should have underlined the key words. What is
the first sentence trying to do? Instead of beginning immediately with facts as in choice C, the author chooses to create
interest by making a surprising statement ("Potatoes changed history. . . ."). The intent is not to mislead as in choice B
or to "promote" a myth as in choice D. The most likely wrong answer is E, but nothing in this paragraph is seen from a
"humorous perspective" as in choice E. The best choice is A.
2. From the passage, one can infer that during the famine, aid from the British came too late because of
A. animosity between the English and the Irish.
B. poor methods of food distribution.
C. inadequate communication about the extent of the disaster.
D. the British policy of laissez faire.
E. the lack of agricultural diversity.
First, you should have underlined the words "infer" and "aid came too late because." Remember, inference questions
are asking you to read between the lines. Focusing on lines 5-6 will give you the answer. The British government didn't
intervene in the famine earlier because British economic policy was "hands off," that is, the less intervention by govern-
ment, the better-the British policy of laissez faire, choice D. It is possible that A, B, and C are accurate, but none of
these is covered in the passage. E doesn't make sense as an answer here. The best choice is D.
Did you read the passage actively, marking major points? Did you preread the two questions? Did you mark the key
words in the questions?
Let's try one more short reading passage.
Part I: Analysis of Exam Areas
Questions 3-4 are based on the following passage.
Chipmunks recently challenged the scientific dogma that small mammals were forced south during the Ice Age
18,000 years ago. DNA samples from more than 200 chipmunks in Illinois and Wisconsin were used to construct a
family tree showing that chipmunks migrated further south only after glaciers receded. Scientists determined the
chipmunks' migration routes by analyzing mutations in their genes. The longer a group of animals remains in one
place, the more mutations they accumulate, increasing their genetic diversity. Animals leaving the refuge for a new
area take only a few of the changes, and, therefore, the new group has less variety in its genes. The chipmunk pop-
ulations found in the south had fewer mutations than those in northern Illinois and Wisconsin.
3. In the passage, the best definition of "dogma" (line 1) is
A. truth.
B. accepted opinion.
C. faith.
D. strict rules.
E. myth.
What does the word "dogma" mean in the passage? From the context of the first sentence, you should understand that
"dogma" refers to something held as an established or accepted opinion (choice B). The paragraph's content contradicts
choice A. Since "dogma" is often used in a religious context, choice C might be tempting, but there is no connection
between the definition of "dogma" and faith. Choice D doesn't make sense, and choice E is simply incorrect. The best
choice is B.
4. According to the passage, less genetic diversity in a chipmunk population supports which of the following
statements?
A. Some chipmunk populations migrated south more recently than previously believed.
B. Chipmunks are the most resilient of the small mammal groups.
C. Northern and southern chipmunks are in fact two different species.
D. Frigid temperatures change the genetic structure of mammals.
E. DNA samples are an unreliable technique in establishing a sequence of events.
This question asks you to find which statement is supported by the passage. Less genetic diversity in the southern chip-
munk population points to the chipmunks migrating after the Ice Age, choice A, not before (lines 2-3). No evidence
supports choice D. Although choice B could be true, it is irrelevant, and choice C is simply inaccurate and not sug-
gested anywhere in the passage. The scientists' conclusions about the later migration of chipmunks are based on genetic
information, and any doubts there might be about DNA evidence as in choice E are outside the scope of the passage.
The best answer is A.
Related, or Paired, Passages
You'll be given two passages (paired passages) that have a common theme or subject. Each passage in some way relates
to the other passage-sometimes supporting, sometimes opposing the views given. In some instances, the two passages
are about the same subject but were written at different times-years, decades, or centuries-or in different places. You
can use all of the general strategies given on pages 19-20 for these paired passages. In addition, many of the strategies
given for single passages are also effective here, but there are some new strategies you can use for paired passages.
Introduction to the Critical Reading Section
Specific Strategies for Questions Based on Paired Passages
■ Carefully read any introductory material describing or giving information about the two passages.
■ Note that the first group of questions refers to the first passage; the second group of questions refers to the second
passage; and the last group of questions refers to both passages as they relate to each other.
■ Consider reading the first passage, then answering the first group of questions, and then reading the second passage,
and answering the remaining questions.
■ Be aware that the first question can (and sometimes does) ask for the primary purpose of both passages.
■ Be aware of how the passages are alike and different.
■ Watch out for choices that are true for one passage but not the other.
■ Read the passages looking for the main point and the structure of each passage.
■ Make sure that your answer is supported by the passages. Some good or true answers are not correct.
■ As you read, note the tone of each passage.
■ Take advantage of the line numbers.
■ Use the context to figure out the meaning of words, even if you're unfamiliar with them.
■ Read all the choices, since you're looking for the best answer given.
■ Use an elimination strategy.
Following is a set of "paired passages" with questions and explanations. Try your hand at marking the passages and the
questions and answering the questions before you read the explanation and analysis of each.
Samples
Questions 1-13 are based on the following passages.
The following two passages, written in 1960 and 1980, discuss some limitations of television programs.
Passage 1
Despite all this increase in commercialization some-but not all-advertising men have wanted still greater
control of the total content of the shows they sponsor. One producer, John E. Hasty, who had made shows for both
Hollywood and television, was quoted as arguing that television could reach its full potential as an advertising
medium only when advertising men produced the shows. "TV viewers cannot be regarded as an audience to be en-
tertained," he said. "They are prospects . . . for what the sponsor has to sell. This fact constitutes the show's reason
for being. . . . Thus in a TV production the selling motive stands as the dominant factor."
He granted that showmen from Broadway and Hollywood might possess certain important skills that affect
scripts, talent, music, and choreography, and that they might be generously endowed with skill and imagination.
But, he asked, "Does this overbalance a seasoned adman's experience in mass selling?"
Many sponsors tend to view their television vehicles as total advertisements. The Institute for Advertising
Research has begun offering a new measuring technique called Television Program Analysis which weights the to-
tal value of a program as an ad for the company. And an advertising trade journal in 1960 observed, "From all in-
dications, a better tailoring of program type to advertiser, and commercial to program, is in the making. Taken
together, commercials and programs in many cases accentuate the values of a high-consumption economy."
Marketing consultant Victor Lebow summed up the powerful appeal television has as a selling medium when he
pointed out: "It creates a new set of conditions, impelling toward a monopoly of the consumer's attention. For the
first time, almost the entire American consuming public has become a captive audience. . . . Television actually
sells the generalized idea of consumption." Cases in point to support this theory that television sells "the general-
ized idea of consumption" might be the squeals and ahs of television audiences on panel shows when prizes such
as stoves, refrigerators, rotisseries, and matched luggage are unveiled amid fanfare.
One might speculate also on what it does to a people's sense of values-especially to children's-when discus-
sions of significant events are followed on television by announcers who in often louder and more solemn voices
announce a great new discovery for a hair bleach. Or, to consider another kind of juxtaposition, a broadcast appeal
to aid hungry children in mid-1960 was followed immediately by a dog-food commercial.
Part I: Analysis of Exam Areas
Passage 2
A story's "newsworthiness" is often determined by geography. Journalist Thomas Griffith describes how he and
his colleagues used to argue over "how many people would have to be killed where to make news-three people in
an auto wreck in your own town? Ten people drowning in a shipwreck in the English Channel; twenty-five in an
avalanche in the Alps-and now the numbers increase sharply-one hundred in an earthquake in Turkey; three
hundred in the collapse of a bridge in Bolivia; one thousand in a typhoon off Calcutta; fifteen hundred in a fire in
China?" News, it appears, is what happens in your own backyard.
This kind of reporting helps to magnify our provincialism. The average American, asked to draw a map of the
world, would probably show the U.S.A. occupying half of the land surface, with Europe and Russia and China and
Africa tucked off in some untidy, insignificant corner of the globe.
Television news dissolves meaning in a wash of flashy images. The takeover of Afghanistan is summed up with
a close-up view of a weeping widow, the problem of inflation with an image of the interior of a supermarket with a
tight shot of the price of hamburger, the importance of gold price fluctuations with footage of gold traders franti-
cally jostling each other to get their orders in. A typical half-hour news broadcast has fifteen to twenty stories.
Allowing time for commercial interruptions, that leaves an average of one minute per story. Congressman Michael
Synar says this makes for a simple-minded electorate: "When I go home I have to deal with people, and all they
know of a four-hundred-page bill is one paragraph in the Sunday paper or a thirty-second TV spot. Issues don't
break that way, but people just don't grasp the complexity."
The criterion for how much time a story gets, or whether it appears at all, is not its relative importance in world
affairs. "We like stories that have wiggle," one network executive says. "Sexy stories. Iran has wiggle. Defectors
from the Bolshoi have wiggle. Stories about government agencies have no wiggle."
In the mind of many network news executives, the difference between a good news story and Marilyn Monroe's
posterior is undetectable. Reporters are told to go after the human interest angle to a story-the "people factor"-
rather than to explore the how or why of a particular event. Researcher David Altheide once accompanied a
reporter assigned to do a story on proposed alternatives to achieve racial integration. As they left the studio, the
reporter explained how he planned to do the story: "Just barely give a background as to what these alternatives are.
Explain the story over film of kids, bless their little hearts, who have no say in the matter whatsoever, caught in a
game of politics between their parents and the school board." The dramatic peg for the story was thus determined
before the reporter had even arrived at the scene!
Notice that the line numbers of the passages continue from the first to the second passage. The first group of ques-
tions is typically about Passage 1 .
1. Which of the following best fulfills the ideal of the producer quoted in the first two paragraphs of Passage 1?
A. Music television
B. Educational television
C. Home-shopping television
D. Twenty-four hour television news
E. Situation comedy
Because the producer believes that selling is the real reason for television and sees the audience only as buyers, his
ideal would be realized by home-shopping television in which there is no pretense about buying and selling. The best
answer is C.
2. In line 9, seasoned means
A. improved in quality.
B. experienced.
C. softened.
D. flavored.
E. changed in ability.
Although a dictionary would list all five of these definitions of seasoned, here it means experienced or mature. The best
choice is B.
3. According to Passage 1, television programs may be expected to become
A. increasingly dependent on comedy and games.
B. more carefully crafted to sell a product.
C. more dependent on Broadway and Hollywood directors.
D. less dependent on depicting sex and violence.
E. more carefully edited to suit children's viewing.
The third paragraph speaks of a better tailoring of program type to advertiser, and commercial to program.The best
choice is B.
4. The sentence Television actually sells the generalized idea of consumption(lines 17-18) is best understood to
mean that
A. the more people watch television, the more likely they are to buy an advertised product.
B. television is by and large indifferent to the ecological needs of the modern world.
C. television, more than any other medium, is suited to the selling of products to a mass audience.
D. game and panel programs which feature costly prizes pander to the greed of the audience.
E. by reflecting the consumer values of society, television encourages its viewer to consume more.
Although some of the statements here may be true or may express ideas that the passage is in sympathy with, only E
specifically paraphrases or interprets the quotation of the question. By showing consumer products and luxury, televi-
sion programs make the idea of owning more attractive to viewers. The best choice is E.
5. In line 23, the word juxtaposition means
A. placing side by side.
B. sequence of events.
C. misunderstanding.
D. unintentional joke.
E. inappropriate comparison.
A juxtaposition is a placing side by side. The best choice is A.
The next group of questions is usually about Passage 2.
6. Which of the following best answers the question of the first paragraph of Passage 2, how many people would
have to be killed where to make news (line 26)?
A. A small number of deaths will not make news.
B. The number killed in an earthquake must be at least four times greater than the number killed in an
avalanche.
C. Local accidents are not news.
D. The smaller the number of deaths, the closer to home they must be.
E. Ten deaths in an air crash in East Africa would be more likely to make news than ten deaths in an explosion
in West Africa.
Introduction to the Critical Reading Section
The question asks both how many and where. The passage makes clear that news, on television, is what happens in your
own backyard, so a small number of local deaths would make news, but in distant areas, the size and spectacle would
have to be much greater. The best choice is D.
7. In the second paragraph of Passage 2, the point of describing the world map an average American would draw is
to show that
A. Americans know less about geography than the citizens of other countries.
B. the United States occupies half of the world's land surface.
C. Americans have a false notion of the importance of the United States.
D. Americans are usually unable to identify the capital cities of other nations.
E. Americans' knowledge of geography has improved since television became popular.
The paragraph is about the provincialism, that is, the narrowness of outlook, of most Americans, and the map most
Americans would draw reveals how little they know about the rest of the world and how much they overestimate their
own importance. The passage does not tell us whether or not people elsewhere are more or less provincial. The best
choice is C.
8. In Passage 2 (line 40), the word bill means
A. a statement of charges for services or goods.
B. any written document with a seal.
C. a list of things offered.
D. a draft of a law.
E. a bank note.
As it is used here, bill means the draft of a law. The speaker is a Congressman speaking of his constituents' ignorance
of legislation in Congress. The best choice is D.
9. The phrase to have wiggle used in the fourth paragraph of Passage 2 is best taken to mean to
A. have popular appeal.
B. have overt sexual interest.
C. involve stars of film or theater.
D. move sinuously.
E. have serious implications.
As it is used here, wiggle is figurative, not literal, since Iran has wiggle. It stands for what has popular appeal. The best
choice is A.
10 . Of the following aspects of television mentioned in Passage 2, which does the author believe should be foremost
in news broadcasting?
A. flashy images (line 34)
B. wiggle (line 43)
C. the human interest angle (line 46)
D. the "people factor" (line 46)
E. the how or why of a particular event (line 47)
Part I: Analysis of Exam Areas
Introduction to the Critical Reading Section
The author would favor television news that deals with the how or why of events, although television programmers have
preferred the four other options. The best choice is E.
11. From Passage 2, it can be inferred that a news story on which of the following topics would be least likely to
appear on television news broadcasts?
A. The computer systems of the Internal Revenue Service
B. A local woman's entry in the Miss America contest
C. The marriage of a rock star and a soap opera actress
D. The effect of flooding on the Mississippi
E. Espionage in New York City
The computers of the IRS have little drama, human interest, or local appeal, so they are less likely to be considered
newsworthy. The best choice is A.
The last group of questions usually relies on both passages, comparing and contrasting general ideas and specific
points.
12 . Unlike Passage 2, Passage 1 is an attack upon television chiefly for its
A. parochialism.
B. materialism.
C. superficiality.
D. anti-intellectualism.
E. lack of objectivity.
The focus of Passage 1 is on materialism, television as a vehicle for selling. Passage 2 attacks the parochialism, superfi-
ciality, and anti-intellectualism of television news broadcasts. The best choice is B.
13 . Which of the following best describes the primary difference between the two passages?
A. Passage 1 is serious in tone, while Passage 2 is comic and colloquial.
B. Passage 1, on the whole, approves of television programming, while Passage 2 is harshly critical.
C. Passage 1 is concerned with the way that television harms the moral values of all viewers, while Passage 2
is concerned with the failure to report world events accurately.
D. Passage 1 is chiefly concerned with the influence of advertisers on television, while Passage 2 is chiefly
concerned with the superficiality of television news programs.
E. Passage 1 is concerned with the audience of television programs, while Passage 2 is concerned with the
programs.
Passage 2, though colloquial, is very serious in tone. Neither passage approves of television as it is. Passage 1 mentions
value in only one paragraph. Both passages are concerned with audience and programs. Choice D is a reasonable sum-
mary of the two passages. The best choice is D.
Part I: Analysis of Exam Areas
A Summary of Strategies for
Critical Reading Questions
■ Read the passage actively, marking main points and other items you feel are important.
■ You may want to skim a few questions first, marking words that give you a clue about the passage before
you read the passage.
■ Base your answer on what you read in the passage, the introduction to the passage, or footnotes given
following the passage.
■ The passage must support your answer.
■ Some good or true answers are not correct. Make sure that the answer you select is "what the question is
asking."
■ Be sure to read all of the choices to make sure that you have the best of the ones given.
■ Pace yourself. Don't get stuck on the passage or any one question.
■ When more than one reading passage is given, you may want to first read the passage that is of more
interest or familiarity to you and answer those questions first. When skipping, be extra careful to mark your
answers in the proper place on your answer sheet.
■ On paired passages, the first questions will refer to Passage 1, the next group of questions to Passage 2,
and the final group to both passages as they relate to each other.
Three Final Strategies
If you're having real trouble with a passage or simply running out of time, try one of these three strategies.
■ Skip a difficult passage. You could skip a difficult passage entirely, along with the questions based on it,
and come back to them later. Remember that you can return to those questions only while you're working
in that section. Also, if you use this strategy, take care to mark your answers in the correct spaces on the
answer sheet when you skip a group of questions.
■ Skim the passage. If you're running out of time, you might want to skim the passage and then answer
the questions-referring back to the passage when necessary.
■ Potshot questions and spots in the passage. For this "last resort method," simply read the questions
that refer to specific lines in the passage and read only those specific lines in the passage (potshot them) to
try to answer the question. This final strategy may help you at least eliminate some answer choices and take
some educated guesses.
Introduction to the Critical Reading Section
Common Prefixes, Suffixes, and Roots
The following list should help you to arrive at definitions of unfamiliar words in the critical reading sections of the SAT
and PSAT/NMSQT. These prefixes, suffixes, and roots apply to thousands of words.
Prefixes
Prefix Meaning Example
ad- to, toward advance
anti- against antidote
bi- two bicycle
com- together, with composite
de- away, from deter
epi- upon epilogue
equi- equal, equally equivalent
ex- out of expel
homo- same, equal, like homogenized
hyper- over, too much hyperactive
hypo- under, too little hypodermic
in- not insufficient
in- into instruct
inter- between interstate
mal- bad malfunction
mis- wrong mistake
mono- alone, one monolith
non- not nonentity
ob- against objection
omni- all, everywhere omniscient
over- above overbearing
poly- many polymorphous
pre- before precede
pro- forward propel
re- back, again regress
retro- backward retrograde
semi- half, partly semicircle
sub- under submarine
trans- across, beyond transcend
un- not unneeded
Suffixes
Suffix Meaning Example
-able, -ible able to usable
-er, -or one who does competitor
-ism the practice of rationalism
-ist one who is occupied with feminist
-less without, lacking meaningless
-ship the art or skill of statesmanship
-fy to make dignify
-ness the quality of aggressiveness
-tude the state of rectitude
-logue a particular kind of speaking or writing prologue
Roots
Root Meaning Example
arch to rule monarch
belli war, warlike belligerent
bene good benevolent
chron time chronology
dic to say indicative
fac to make, to do artifact
graph writing telegraph
mort to die mortal
port to carry deport
vid, vis to see invisible
Part I: Analysis of Exam Areas
Introduction to the Mathematics Section
The Mathematical sections of the new SAT consist of two basic types of questions: regular multiple-choice questions
and student-produced responses, also known as grid-ins.
Two Math sections are 25 minutes in length and one Math section is 20 minutes in length. Since one section of the test
is experimental (although you don't know which one), you could have an additional 25-minute Math section.
Although the order of the sections and the number of questions may change, at this time, the three sections total about
52 to 56 math questions that count toward your score. These three sections generate a scaled math score that ranges
from 200 to 800. About 50% right should generate an average score.
The math sections are slightly graduated in difficulty. That is, the easiest questions are basically at the beginning and
the more difficult ones at the end. If a section has two types of questions, usually each type starts with easier problems.
For example, a section starts with easy multiple-choice questions, and the last few multiple-choice questions are more
difficult before you start the grid-ins; the grid-ins start with easy questions and move toward the more difficult ones at
the end.
You will be given reference information preceding each Mathematics section. You should be familiar with this information.
You may use an approved calculator on the SAT. Bring a calculator with which you are familiar.
Using Your Calculator
The new SAT allows the use of approved calculators, and the College Board (the people who sponsor the exam) recom-
mends that each test taker take a calculator to the test. Even though no question will require the use of a calculator-
that is, each question can be answered without a calculator-in some instances, using a calculator will save you
valuable time.
You should
■ Bring your own calculator, because you can't borrow one during the exam.
■ Bring a calculator even if you don't think you'll use it. Make sure that you are familiar with the use of your
calculator.
■ Make sure that your calculator has new, fresh batteries and is in good working order.
■ Practice using your calculator on some of the problems to see when and where it will be helpful.
■ Check for a shortcut to any problem that seems to involve much computation. But use your calculator if it will be
time effective. If there appears to be too much computation or the problem seems impossible without the calcula-
tor, you're probably doing something wrong.
■ Before doing an operation, check the number that you keyed on the display to make sure that you keyed in the
right number. You may want to check each number as you key it in.
Be careful that you
■ Don't rush out and buy a sophisticated calculator for the test.
■ Don't bring a calculator that you're unfamiliar with.
■ Don't bring a pocket organizer, handheld mini-computer, laptop computer, or calculator with a typewriter-type
keypad or paper tape.
■ Don't bring a calculator that requires an outlet or any other external power source.
■ Don't bring a calculator that makes noise.
Part I: Analysis of Exam Areas
■ Don't try to share a calculator.
■ Don't try to use a calculator on every problem.
■ Don't become dependent on your calculator.
Following is the Calculator Policy for new SAT as given by the College Board:
"The following are not permitted:
■ Powerbooks and portable/handheld computers
■ Electronic writing pads or pen-input/stylus-driven (e.g., Palm, PDAs, Casio ClassPad 300)
■ Models with QWERTY (i.e., typewriter) keyboards (e.g., TI-92 Plus, V oyage 200)
■ Models with paper tapes
■ Models that make noise or "talk"
■ Models that require an electrical outlet
■ Cell phone calculators"
Take advantage of using a calculator on the test. Learn to use a calculator efficiently by practicing. As you approach a
problem, first focus on how to solve that problem and then decide whether the calculator will be helpful. Remember,
a calculator can save you time on some problems, but also remember that each problem can be solved without a calcu-
lator. Also remember that a calculator will not solve a problem for you. You must understand the problem first.
Basic Skills and Concepts that You Should Know
Number and Operations
■ Operations with fractions
■ Applying addition, subtraction, multiplication, and division to problem solving
■ Arithmetic mean (average), mode, and median
■ Ratio and proportion
■ Number properties: positive and negative integers, odd and even numbers, prime numbers, factors and multiples,
divisibility
■ Word problems, solving for: percents, averages, rate, time, distance, interest, price per item
■ Number line: order, consecutive numbers, fractions, betweenness
■ Sequences involving exponential growth
■ Sets (union, intersection, elements)
Algebra and Functions
■ Operations with signed numbers
■ Substitution for variables
■ Working with algebraic expressions
■ Manipulating integer and rational exponents
■ Solving rational equations and inequalities
■ Working with linear functions-graphs and equations
■ Solving radical equations
■ Direct and inverse variation
■ Function notation and evaluation
■ Concepts of range and domain
■ Working with positive roots
■ Solving quadratic equations
■ Working with quadratic functions and graphs
Geometry and Measurement
■ Perpendicular and parallel lines
■ Perimeter, area, angle measure of polygons
■ Circumference, area, radius, diameter
■ Triangles: right, isosceles, equilateral, angle measure, similarity
■ Pythagorean theorem
■ V olume and surface area of solids
■ Coordinate geometry: coordinates, slope, distance formula, midpoint formula
■ Geometric notation for length, segments, lines, rays, and congruence
■ Properties of tangent lines
■ Problems in which trigonometry could be used as an alternate solution method
■ Qualitative behavior of graphs and functions
■ Transformations and their effect on graphs and functions
Data Analysis, Statistics, and Probability
■ Interpreting graphs, charts, and tables
■ Geometric probability
■ Basic statistics (mean, mode, median, range)
Multiple-Choice Questions
You should have a total of about 42 to 46 multiple-choice questions spread throughout the three Math sections that
count toward your score.
Ability Tested
The Mathematics multiple-choice questions test your ability to solve mathematical problems involving arithmetic, alge-
bra I and II, geometry, data interpretation, basic statistics and probability, and word problems by using problem-solving
insight, logic, and the application of basic skills.
Introduction to the Mathematics Section
Basic Skills Necessary
The basic skills necessary to do well on this section include high school algebra I and II, and intuitive or informal
geometry. No calculus is necessary. Logical insight into problem-solving situations is also necessary.
Directions
Solve each problem in this section by using the information given and your own mathematical calculations, insights,
and problem-solving skills. Then select the one correct answer of the five choices given and mark the corresponding
circle on your answer sheet. Use the available space on the page for your scratch work.
Notes
■ All numbers used are real numbers.
■ Calculators may be used.
■ Some problems may be accompanied by figures or diagrams. These figures are drawn as accurately as possible
EXCEPT when it is stated in a specific problem that a figure is not drawn to scale. The figures and diagrams are
meant to provide information useful in solving the problem or problems. Unless otherwise stated, all figures and
diagrams lie in a plane.
■ A list of data that may be used for reference is included.
Analysis of Directions
1. All scratch work is to be done in the test booklet; get used to doing this because no scratch paper is allowed into
the testing area.
2. You are looking for the one correct answer; therefore, although other answers may be close, there is never more
than one right answer.
Suggested Approaches with Samples
Circle or Underline
Take advantage of being allowed to mark on the test booklet by always underlining or circling what you are looking
for. This will ensure that you are answering the right question.
Samples
1. If x + 6 = 9, then 3x + 1 =
A. 3
B. 9
You should first circle or underline 3x + 1 because this is what you are solving for. Solving for x leaves x = 3, then substi-
tuting into 3x + 1 gives 3(3) + 1, or 10. The most common mistake is to solve for x, which is 3, and mistakenly choose A as
your answer. But remember, you are solving for 3x + 1, not just x. You should also notice that most of the other choices
would all be possible answers if you made common or simple mistakes. Make sure that you are answering the right ques-
tion. The correct answer is C.
Part I: Analysis of Exam Areas
2. Together, a hat and coat cost $125. The coat costs $25 more than the hat. What is the cost of the coat?
The key words here are cost of the coat, so circle those words. To solve algebraically,
x = hat
x + $25 = coat (cost $25 more than the hat)
Together they cost $125.
(x + 25) + x = 125
But this is the cost of the hat. Notice that $50 is one of the answer choices, B. Since x = 50, then x + 25 = 75. Therefore,
the coat costs $75, which is choice C. Always answer the question that is being asked. Circling the key word or words
will help you do that. The correct answer is C.
3. If x3 + y3 = 11 and x3 - y3 = 5, then what is the value of x6 - y6 ?
A. 6
E. Cannot be determined from the given information
First circle or underline x6 - y6.
Now factor this difference of two squares.
Next substitute in 11 for x3 + y3 and 5 for x3 - y3
The correct answer is D.
Pull Out Information
"Pulling" information out of the word problem structure can often give you a better look at what you are working
with; therefore, you gain additional insight into the problem.
Introduction to the Mathematics Section
Samples
1. If a mixture is 7
alcohol by volume and 7
water by volume, what is the ratio of the volume of alcohol to the
volume of water in this mixture?
A. 7
B. 7
C. 4
D. 3
E. 4
The first bit of information that should be pulled out should be what you are looking for: ratio of the volume of alcohol to
the volume of water. Rewrite it as A:W and then into its working form: W
A
. Next, you should pull out the volumes of each:
A = 7
3 and W = 7
Now the answer can be easily figured by inspection or substitution. Using 7
_i , invert the bottom fraction and mul-
tiply to get 7
# == . The ratio of the volume of alcohol to the volume of water is 3 to 4. The correct answer is C.
When pulling out information, actually write out the numbers and/or letters to the side of the problem, putting them
into some helpful form and eliminating some of the wording.
2. Bill is ten years older than his sister. If Bill was twenty-five years of age in 1983, in what year could he have
been born?
The key words here are in what year and could he have been born. Thus, the solution is simple: 1983 - 25 = 1958,
answer C. Notice that you pulled out the information twenty-five years of age and in 1983. The fact about Bill's age
in comparison to his sister's age was not needed, however, and was not pulled out. The correct answer is C.
Work Forward
If you quickly see the method to solve the problem, then do the work.
Samples
1. Which of the following numbers is between 3
and 4
Part I: Analysis of Exam Areas
You should first underline or circle between 3
and 4
? If you know that 3
is .333... and 4
is .25, you might have insight
into the problem and should simply work forward. .29 is the only number between .333... and .25, correct answer is C.
By the way, a quick peek at the answer choices would tip you off that you should work in decimals.
_i =
Since this problem is very mechanical, if you know the method, work forward.
Place each item within the ( ) to the 2
1 power.
Next, take the square root of each one.
ab a b
ab
$$_ ^ __i h ii
The correct answer is D.
3. If 2x - 5 > 3, what are the possible values of x?
A. x < 4
B. x < 2
C. x > 0
D. x > 2
E. x > 4
First circle or underline "possible values of x." Now solve the problem as follows:
2x - 5 > 3
Add 5 to each side, +5 +5
This gives 2 x > 8
Now divide by 2, >x
So x > 4
The correct answer is E.
4. If y varies inversely to x and y = 8 when x = 3, then what is the value of y when x = 4?
B. 3
C. 9
D. 7
E. 6
First underline or circle "value of y." Next, work the problem forward.
Introduction to the Mathematics Section
Since y varies inversely to x,
Next plug in for x and y,
y xk
k
k
Hence, y x y24
24 6and== =
The correct answer is E.
5. What are the x-intercepts of the ellipse 9x2 + 4y2 = 36?
First, circle or underline "x-intercepts." Next, if you know how to solve the problem, work forward.
To find x-intercepts, set y = 0 and solve for x.
The correct answer is E.
If you didn't know how to work the problem forward, you could have worked backwards, from the answers by simply
plugging in.
Work Backwards
In some instances, it will be easier to work from the answers. Do not disregard this method because it will at least
eliminate some of the choices and could give you the correct answer.
Samples
1. What is the approximate value of 1596?
Without the answer choices, this could be a difficult problem. By working up from the answer choices, however, the
problem is easily solvable. Since 1596 means what number times itself equals 1596, you can take any answer choice
and multiply it by itself. As soon as you find the answer choice that when multiplied by itself approximates 1596,
Part I: Analysis of Exam Areas
you've got the correct answer. You may want to start working from the middle choice, since the answers are usually in
increasing or decreasing order. In the problem above, start with choice C, 30. Since 30 × 30 = 900, which is too small,
you could now eliminate A, B, and C as too small. But 40 × 40 = 1600, approximately 1596. Choice D is correct. If
your calculator computes square roots, you could have used it to compute the square root and then rounded off.
2. If x
4 + 2 = 22, what is the value of x?
If you cannot solve this algebraically, you may use the work up from your choices strategy. But start with C, 100. What
if x = 100?
x
Note that since 27 is too large, choices D and E will also be too large. Therefore, try A. If A is too small, then you know
the answer is B. If A works, the answer is A.
x
Since A is too small, the correct answer must be B.
3. What is the greatest common factor of the numbers 18, 24, and 30?
A. 2
B. 3
C. 4
D. 6
The largest number which divides evenly into 18, 24, and 30 is 6. You could have worked from the answers. But here you
should start with the largest answer choice, since you're looking for the greatest common factor. The correct answer is D.
4. If 8x + 3 = 32x + 3, then x =
A. -4
B. -3
C. 0
D. 3
E. 4
Introduction to the Mathematics Section
First underline or circle "x =". If you don't know how to solve this problem, work backwards.
Start by plugging in the value in choice C, 0.
Since you can quickly see that these two are not equal, try choice D, 3.
Since these are not equal, and it is evident that no positive value for x will work, you should try choice B, -3.
Since any number to the zero power equals one, these two are equal. The correct answer is B.
Solving this algebraically would look like this:
__ ii
-6 = 2x
-3 = x
Use Your Calculator
Some questions will need to be completely worked out. If you don't see a fast method but do know that you could
compute the answer, use your calculator.
Samples
1. What is the final cost of a watch that sells for $49.00 if the sales tax is 7%?
Since the sales tax is 7% of $49.00,
The total cost of the watch is therefore
The correct answer is D.
Part I: Analysis of Exam Areas
Your calculator would have helped with these calculations.
Price List
Top sirloin $2.99 per pound or
2 pounds for $5.00
Filet mignon $4.00 per pound
London broil $1 .79 per pound or
3 pounds for $5.00
2. Randy owns and manages Randy's Steakhouse. He needs to buy the following meats in order to have enough for
the weekend business: 9 pounds of top sirloin, 8 pounds of filet mignon, and 7 pounds of London broil. Using
the price list given above, what is the least amount Randy can spend to buy the meat he needs for the weekend
business?
top sirloin: 8 pounds + 1 pound
= (4 × $5.00) + $2.99 (note: 2 pounds for $5.00)
filet mignon: 8 pounds
London broil: 6 pounds + 1 pound
= (2 × $5.00) + $1.79 (note: 3 pounds for $5.00)
Add to find the total: $22.99 + $32.00 + $11.79 = $66.78
The correct answer is C.
Your calculator would have helped with these calculations.
3. If the nth term of sequence 4, 12, 36, 108,... is 4 ⋅3n - 1, what is the 10th term of the sequence?
Introduction to the Mathematics Section
To find the 10th term of the sequence simply plug in 10 for n as follows:
This problem could have taken a very long time without your calculator. The correct answer is D.
Substitute Simple Numbers
Substituting numbers for variables can often be an aid to understanding a problem. Remember to substitute simple
numbers, since you have to do the work.
Samples
1. If x > 1, then which of the following decreases as x decreases?
I. x + x2
II. 2 x2 - x
III. x 1
A. I only
B. II only
C. III only
D. I and II only
E. II and III only
This problem is most easily solved by taking each situation and substituting in simple numbers. However, in the first situa-
tion (I. x + x2), you should recognize that this expression will decrease as x decreases. Trying x = 2 gives 2 + (2)2 = 6.
Now, trying x = 3 gives 3 + (3)2 = 12. Notice that choices B, C, and E are already eliminated because they do not contain I.
You should also realize that now you need to try only the values in II. Since III is not paired with I as a possible choice,
III cannot be one of the answers.
Trying x = 2 in the expression 2x2 - x gives 2(2)2 - 2, or 2(4) - 2 = 6. Now, trying x = 3 gives 2 + 32 = 12 or 2(9) - 3 = 15.
This expression also decreases as x decreases. Therefore, the correct answer is D. Once again, notice that III was not even
attempted because it was not one of the possible choices. Be sure to make logical substitutions. Use a positive number, a
negative number, or zero when applicable to get the full picture.
2. If x is a positive integer in the equation 12x = q, then q must be
A. a positive even integer.
B. a negative even integer.
C. zero.
D. a positive odd integer.
E. a negative odd integer.
At first glance, this problem appears quite complex. But let's plug in some numbers, and see what happens. For instance,
first plug in 1 (the simplest positive integer) for x.
Part I: Analysis of Exam Areas
12x = q
Now try 2,
12x = q
Try it again. No matter what positive integer is plugged in for x, q will always be positive and even. Therefore, the cor-
rect answer is A.
3. If f(x) = 3x, which of the following CANNOT be a value of f(x)?
A. -3
B. 3
C. 1
D. 3
E. 9
Notice that you are looking for "CANNOT be a value of f(x)." Try some simple numbers (0, 1, -1) and you will see that
regardless of the values used for x, 3x cannot be a negative number (or zero).
-= =
^h
So f(x) = 3x > 0, f(x) ≠ -3
The correct answer is A.
Some problems may deal with percent or percent change. If you don't see a simple method for working the
problem, try using the values of 1 0 or 1 00 and see what you get.
1. A corporation triples its annual bonus to 50 of its employees. What percent of the employees' new bonus is the
increase?
Let's use $100 for the normal bonus. If the annual bonus was normally $100, tripled it would now be $300. Therefore,
the increase ($200) is 3
of the new bonus ($300). Two-thirds is %66 3
. The correct answer is B.
Introduction to the Mathematics Section
2. Tom is building a square wooden framework to pour cement. His first frame is too small, so he increases each
side by 20%. After careful measurement, he realizes this frame is too large, so he decreases each side by 10%.
The area contained by his final wooden frame is what percent greater than the original wooden frame?
First circle or underline what you are looking for, in this case-area . . . percent greater . . . than original.
Next, draw the diagram.
Now try some simple numbers. In this case 10":
Increasing this measurement by 20% gives a side of 12":
Decreasing this measurement by 10% gives 12 - 1.2 = 10.8. (10% × 12 = 1.2.)
The area of the original was 100 sq. in. The area of the new figure is 116.64 sq. in. So the percent greater than the origi-
nal would be 116.64 - 100 = 16.64 compared to the original 100 gives 16.64%. The correct answer is C. Your calculator
could have been helpful in this problem.
Part I: Analysis of Exam Areas
Be Reasonable
Sometimes you will immediately recognize a simple method to solve a problem. If this is not the case, try a reason-
able approach and then check the answers to see which one is most reasonable.
Samples
1. Barney can mow the lawn in 5 hours, and Fred can mow the lawn in 4 hours. How long will it take them to mow
the lawn together?
A. 5 hours
1 hours
C. 4 hours
2 hours
E. 1 hour
Suppose that you are unfamiliar with the type of equation for this problem. Try the "reasonable" method. Since Fred
can mow the lawn in 4 hours by himself, it will take less than 4 hours if Barney helps him. Therefore, choices A, B,
and C are ridiculous. Taking this method a little further, suppose that Barney could also mow the lawn in 4 hours. Then,
together it would take Barney and Fred 2 hours. But since Barney is a little slower than this, the total time should be a
little more than 2 hours. The correct answer is D, 2 9
hours.
Using the equation for this problem would give the following calculations:
In 1 hour, Barney could do 5
of the job, and in 1 hour, Fred could do 4
of the job. Unknown 1/x is that part of the job
they could do together in one hour. Now solving, you calculate as follows:
x
x
Cross multiplying gives 9 x = 20
Therefore, x = 9
2. Circle O is inscribed in square ABCD as shown above. The area of the shaded region is approximately
O
D C
BA
r
Introduction to the Mathematics Section
Using a reasonable approach, you would first find the area of the square: 10 × 10 = 100. Then divide the square into
four equal sections as follows:
Since a quarter of the square is 25, then the shaded region must be much less than 25. The only possible answer is
choice A, 10.
Another approach to this problem would be to first find the area of the square: 10 × 10 = 100. Then subtract the approx-
imate area of the circle:
Therefore, the total area inside the square but outside the circle is approximately 25. One quarter of that area is shaded.
Therefore, 4
is approximately the shaded area. The closest answer is A, 10.
Sketch a Diagram
Sketching diagrams or simple pictures can also be very helpful in problem solving because the diagram may tip off
either a simple solution or a method for solving the problem.
Samples
1. If all sides of a square are halved, the area of that square is
A. halved
B. divided by 3
C. divided by 4
D. divided by 8
E. divided by 16
One way to solve this problem is to draw a square and then halve all its sides. Then compare the two areas.
Your first diagram
S
S
Part I: Analysis of Exam Areas
Halving every side
Notice that the total area of the new square will now be one-fourth of the original square. The correct answer is C.
2. If P lies on ON% such that OP PN2=% % and Q lies on OP% such that OQ QP=% % , what is the ratio of OQ% to PN% ?
A. 3
B. 2
C. 1
D. 1
E. 1
A sketch would look like this:
It is evident that OQ% = PN% , so the ratio is 1
, or 1. Or you could assign values on ON% such that :OP PN OP2=% % % could equal
2, and PN% could equal 1. If Q lies on OP% such that OQ QP=% % , then OP% (2) is divided in half. So OQ% = 1, and QP% = 1.
So the ratio of OQ% to PN% is 1 to 1. The correct answer is C.
3. What is the maximum number of milk cartons, each 2" wide by 3" long by 4" tall, that can be fit into a
cardboard box with inside dimensions of 16" wide by 9" long by 8" tall?
Drawing a diagram, as shown below, may be helpful in envisioning the process of fitting the cartons into the box.
Notice that 8 cartons will fit across the box, 3 cartons deep, and two "stacks" high:
The correct answer is E.
O N
PQ= ==
S
SS
S
Introduction to the Mathematics Section
4. If points P(1, 1) and Q(1, 0) lie on the same coordinate graph, which of the following must be true?
I. P and Q are equidistant from the origin.
II. P is farther from the origin than P is from Q.
III. Q is farther from the origin than Q is from P.
A. I only
B. II only
C. III only
D. I and II only
E. I and III only
First draw the coordinate graph and then plot the points as follows:
Only II is true. P is farther from the origin than P is from Q. The correct answer is B.
Mark in Diagrams
Marking in or labeling diagrams as you read the questions can save you valuable time. Marking can also give you
insight into how to solve a problem because you will have the complete picture clearly in front of you.
Samples
1. In the triangle above, CD is an angle bisector, angle ACD is 30°, and angle ABC is a right angle. What is the
measurement of angle x in degrees?
D
A C
B
(0,0) is the origin
y
x
Part I: Analysis of Exam Areas
You should have read the problem and marked as follows: In the triangle above, CD is an angle bisector (stop and mark
in the drawing), angle ACD is 30° (stop and mark in the drawing), and angle ABC is a right angle (stop and mark in the
drawing). What is the measurement of angle x in degrees? (Stop and mark in or circle what you are looking for in the
drawing.)
Now, with the drawing marked in, it is evident that, since angle ACD is 30°, then angle BCD is also 30° because they
are formed by an angle bisector (divides an angle into two equal parts). Since angle ABC is 90° (right angle) and angle
BCD is 30°, then angle x is 60° because there are 180° in a triangle.
The correct answer is C. Always mark in diagrams as you read descriptions and information about them. This includes
what you are looking for.
2. If each square in the figure above has a side of length 3, what is the perimeter?
Mark the known facts.
We now have a calculation for the perimeter: 30 plus the darkened parts. Now look carefully at the top two darkened
parts. They will add up to 3. (Notice how the top square may slide over to illustrate that fact.)
D
A C
B
Introduction to the Mathematics Section
The same is true for the bottom darkened parts. They will add up to 3.
Thus, the total perimeter is 30 + 6 = 36, choice E.
3. In the figure above, AB is tangent at A to the circle with center C at A with ∠ ACB = 60° and AB = 12. What is
the radius of circle C?
A. 4
B. 6
E. Cannot be determined from the given information
As always, first circle or underline what you are looking for, in this case radius of circle C.
Next, mark in the diagram as follows.
So add the following information:
BA
C
BA
C
BA
C
These together total 3
Part I: Analysis of Exam Areas
The radius of the circle is AC and since this is a 30-60-90 triangle the ratio of the sides are 1:2: 3.
Therefore, AB AC3= $
Now solve for AC algebraically as follows:
AC
AC
AC
Multiplying by 3
AC 3
The trigonometric solution is as follows:
tan
tan
ACB AC
AB
AC
AC
AC
AC
E =
The correct answer is C. Marking the diagram can give you additional insight into the problem.
Even though the following information isn't given in the form of a diagram, take advantage of being allowed to
write in the test booklet. Make whatever marks or notes that you feel will be helpful.
4. Which of the following is the next number in the series given above?
Some problems may ask you to identify a sequence of either numbers or figures. If numbers are given, look for an obvi-
ous pattern (odd numbers then even numbers, increasing, decreasing, etc.). You may wish to first check for a common
difference between the numbers.
Introduction to the Mathematics Section
Notice that the pattern here is based on the difference between the numbers:
Therefore, the correct answer is B, 21.
Watch for Diagrams Not Drawn to Scale
Diagrams are drawn as accurately as possible, unless a diagram is labeled "not drawn to scale." That label is the tip-
off that the diagram could be drawn differently or is out of proportion. In this case, mark the diagram and/or quickly
redraw it differently. Marking and/or redrawing will give you insight into what information you really have about
the diagram.
Sample
Note: Figure not drawn to scale.
1. In /H17005WXY above, WX = XY. Which of the following must be true?
A. WZ = ZY
B. s = t
C. perimeter of /H17005WXZ = perimeter of /H17005ZXY
D. area of /H17005WXZ = area of /H17005ZXY
Before doing anything else, underline or circle must be true. Now mark the diagram as follows.
Next, since the figure is not drawn to scale, quickly redraw it another way that still conforms to the given information.
WZY
X
WZ Y
X
Part I: Analysis of Exam Areas
Notice that by looking at the way the figure is initially drawn, you might think that WZ = ZY because they appear to be
equal. But after you redraw the figure, you can see that WZ and ZY don't have to be equal, eliminating choice A.
The same can be noticed of s and t. They don't have to be equal, eliminating choice B.
A quick look at the redrawn figure will help you eliminate choice C as well, since it's evident that triangles WXZ and
ZXY don't necessarily have equal perimeters.
You can also eliminate choice D because even though the heights of triangles WXZ and ZXY are equal, their bases could
be different, so the areas could be different. This fact is also evident from your redrawing of the diagram.
Choice E is the correct answer because in any triangle, equal angles are across from equal sides. Your markings in the
figure remind you that this is true.
Approximate
If it appears that extensive calculations are going to be necessary to solve a problem, check to see how far apart the
choices are and then approximate. The reason for checking the answers first is to give you a guide to how freely you
can approximate.
Sample
1. Which of the following is the best approximation of .
899 55#^h to the nearest tenth?
E. .5
Before starting any computations, take a glance at the answers to see how far apart they are. Notice that the only close
answers are C and D. But D is not possible, since it is to the nearest hundredth, not tenth. Now, making some quick
approximations, .899 ≅ 1 and 9.97 ≅ 10, which leaves the problem in this form:
The closest answer is C. Therefore it is the correct answer. Notice that choices A and E are not reasonable. You could
also have used your calculator to obtain an exact answer and then rounded to the nearest tenth.
WZ Y
X
Introduction to the Mathematics Section
Try Some Possibilities
Some questions will involve probability and possible combinations. If you don't know a formal method, try some
possibilities. Set up what could happen. But set up only as much as you need to.
Samples
1. What is the probability of throwing two dice in one toss so that they total 11?
A. 6
You should simply list all the possible combinations resulting in 11, (5 + 6) and (6 + 5), and realize that the total possi-
bilities are 36 (6 × 6). Thus the probability equals
total possibilities
possibilities totaling 11
The correct answer is C.
2. What is the probability of tossing a penny twice so that both times it lands heads up?
A. 8
B. 4
C. 3
D. 2
E. 3
The probability of throwing a head in one throw is
total chances 1 head 1 tail
chances of a head
+ =^h
Since you are trying to throw a head twice, multiply the probability for the first toss 2
_i times the probability for the
second toss (again 2
). Thus, 2
, and 4
is the probability of throwing heads twice in two tosses. Another way of
approaching this problem is to look at the total number of possible outcomes:
Part I: Analysis of Exam Areas
First Toss Second Toss
1. H H
2. H T
3. T H
4. T T
Thus, there are four different possible outcomes. There is only one way to throw two heads in two tosses. Thus, the
probability of tossing two heads in two tosses is 1 out of 4 total outcomes, or 4
The correct answer is B.
3. How many combinations are possible if a person has 4 sports jackets, 5 shirts, and 3 pairs of slacks?
A. 4
B. 5
Since each of the 4 sports jackets may be worn with 5 different shirts, there are 20 possible combinations. These may
be worn with each of the 3 pairs of slacks for a total of 60 possible combinations. Stated simply, 5 × 4 × 3 = 60 possible
combinations.
The correct answer is D.
Glance at the Choices
Some problems may not ask you to solve for a numerical answer or even an answer including variables. Rather, you
may be asked to set up the equation or expression without doing any solving. A quick glance at the answer choices
will help you know what is expected.
Samples
1. Which equation can be used to find the perimeter, P,of a rectangle that has a length of 18 feet and a width of
15 feet?
A. P = (18)(15)
B. P = 18 + 15
D. P = (2)15 + 18
E. P = 2(15 + 18)
The perimeter of a rectangle can be found by adding the length to the width and doubling this sum: P = 2(15 + 18). The
correct answer is E.
Introduction to the Mathematics Section
Harold's age is 3 years less than half Sue's age.
If Harold is 9 years old, how old is Sue?
2. Suppose S represents Sue's age. Which of the following equations can be used to find Sue's age?
A. 9 = 2
1 (S) - 3
B. 9 - 3 = 2
1 (S)
C. 9 = 3 - 2
1 (S)
D. 3 - 9 = 2
1 (S)
E. 2
1 (9) = S - 3
Changing the word sentence into a number sentence (equation):
The correct answer is A.
3. Rick is three times as old as Maria, and Maria is four years older than Leah. If Leah is z years old, what is
Rick's age in terms of z?
A. 3z + 4
B. 3z - 12
C. 3z + 12
D. z
4+^h
E. z
4-^h
Since
z = Leah's age
z + 4 = Maria's age
3(z + 4) = Rick's age
3z + 12 = Rick's age
The correct answer is C.
Look for Definitions
In some problems, you may be given special symbols that you are unfamiliar with. Don't let these special symbols
alarm you. They typically represent an operation or combination of operations that you are familiar with. Look for
the definition of the special symbol or how it is used.
Harold's age is 3 years less than half Sue's age.
Part I: Analysis of Exam Areas
Sample
1. If 9 is a binary operation such that ab9 is defined as ab
ab
- , then what is the value of 329 ?
C. 5
E. 1
The value of ab9 =
ab
ab
Simply replacing a with 3 and b with 2 gives
- = +
The correct answer is D.
A Summary of Strategies for
Multiple-Choice Math Questions
■ Circle or underline.
■ Pull out information.
■ Use your calculator.
■ Substitute simple numbers.
■ Draw or sketch diagrams and figures.
■ Mark in or label diagrams.
■ Watch for diagrams not drawn to scale.
■ Try some possible outcomes.
■ Glance at the choices.
■ Look for definitions.
■ Finally, don't get stuck on any one problem!
Introduction to the Mathematics Section
Grid-In Questions
The new SAT grid-in question type is very similar to the familiar multiple-choice question except that you will now
solve the problem and enter your answer by carefully marking the circles on a special grid. You will not be selecting
from a group of possible answers.
Since you will not be selecting from a group of possible answers, you should be extra careful in checking and double-
checking your answer. Your calculator can be useful in checking answers. Also, keep in mind that answers to grid-in
questions are given either full credit or no credit. There is no partial credit. No points are deducted for incorrect answers
in this section. That is, there is no penalty for guessing or attempting a grid-in, so at least take a guess.
Ability Tested
The grid-in questions test your ability to solve mathematical problems involving arithmetic, algebra I and II, geometry,
data interpretation, basic statistics and probability and word problems by using problem-solving insight, logic, and
application of basic skills.
Basic Skills Necessary
The basic skills necessary to do well on this question type include high school algebra I and II and intuitive or informal
geometry. No calculus is necessary. Skills in arithmetic and basic algebra I and II, along with some logical insight into
problem-solving situations, are also necessary to do well on this question type. Understanding the rules and procedures
for gridding in answers is important.
Before you begin working grid-in questions, it is important that you become familiar with the grid-in rules and procedures
and learn to grid accurately. Let's start explaining the rules and procedures by analyzing the directions.
Directions with Analysis
The following questions require you to solve the problem and enter your answer by carefully marking the circles on the
special grid. Examples of the appropriate way to mark the grid follow. (Comments in parentheses have been added to
help you understand how to grid properly.)
Answer: 3.7
(Notice that the decimal point is located in the shaded row, just above the
numbers. Also notice that the answer has been written in above the gridding.
You should always write in your answer, but the filled-in circles are most
important because they are the ones scored.)1
.. .
Decimal point
Part I: Analysis of Exam Areas
Answer: 2
(Notice that the slash mark (/) indicates a fraction bar. This fraction bar is
located in the shaded row and just above the decimal point in the two middle
columns. Obviously, a fraction bar cannot be in the first or last column.)
Answer: 1 2
Do not grid in mixed numbers in the form of mixed numbers. Always change mixed numbers to improper fractions or
decimals.
Change to 1.5 or Change to 2
(Either an improper fraction or a decimal is acceptable. Never grid in a
mixed number because it will always be misread. For example, 1 2
will be
read by the computer doing the scoring as 2
.. .
.. .
.. .
Fraction bar
Introduction to the Mathematics Section
Answer: 123
Space permitting, answers may start in any column. Each grid-answer below is correct.
(You should try to grid your answers from right to left, learning to be
consistent as you practice. But space permitting, you may start in any
column.)
Note: Circles must be filled in correctly to receive credit. Mark only one circle in each column. No credit will be given
if more than one circle in a column is marked. Example:
Answer: 258 (no credit)
(Filling in more than one circle in a column is equivalent to selecting more than one
answer in a multiple-choice question. This type of answer fill-in will never receive
any credit. Be careful to avoid this mistake.)
.. .
.. .
.. .
Part I: Analysis of Exam Areas
Answer: 9
Accuracy of decimals: Always enter the most accurate decimal value that the grid will accommodate. For example: An
answer such as .8888 . . . can be gridded as .888 or .889. Gridding this value as .8, .88, or .89 is considered inaccurate
and therefore not acceptable. The acceptable grid-ins of 9
are
(Review "accuracy of decimals" a second time. Notice that you must be as accurate as the grid allows.)
Be sure to write your answers in the boxes at the top of the circles before doing your gridding. Although writing out the
answers above the columns is not required, it is very important to ensure accuracy. Even though some problems may
have more than one correct answer, grid only one answer. Grid-in questions contain no negative answers.
(Fractions can be reduced to lowest terms, but it is not required as long as they will fit in the grid. You are not required
to grid a zero before a fraction. For example, either .2 or 0.2 is acceptable. If your answer is zero, you are required only
to grid a zero in one column. Important: If you decide to change an answer, be sure to erase the old gridded answer
completely.)
Practice Grid-Ins
The following practice exercises will help you become familiar with the gridding process. Properly filled in grids are
given following each exercise. Hand write and grid in the answers given.
.. .
.. .
.. .
Introduction to the Mathematics Section
Exercise 1
Answer: 4.5 Answer: .7 Answer: 22.7
Answer: 3
1 Answer: 7
4 Answer: 2
Answer: 3 4
1 Answer: 4 2
1 Answer: 9 7
.. .
.. .
.. .
.. .
.. .
.. .
.. .
.. .
.. .
Part I: Analysis of Exam Areas
Answers to Exercise 1
Answer: 4.5 Answer: .7 Answer: 22.7
or 2
Answer: 3
1 Answer: 7
4 Answer: 2
Answer: 3 4
1 Answer: 4 2
1 Answer: 9 7
must be changed to 4
must be changed to 2
must be changed to 7
.. .
.. .
.. .
.. .
.. .
.. .
.. .
.. .
.. .
Introduction to the Mathematics Section
Exercise 2
Answer: 0 Answer: 39 Answer: 1,542
Answer: 7 3
1 Answer: 1 Answer: 685
Answer: .7272 Answer: .666 . . . Answer: .222 . . .
.. .
.. .
.. .
.. .
.. .
.. .
.. .
.. .
.. .
Part I: Analysis of Exam Areas
Answers to Exercise 2
Answer: 0 Answer: 39 Answer: 1,542
Disregard the comma (,)
Answer: 7 3
1 Answer: 1 Answer: 685
must be changed
to 3
.. .
.. .
.. .
.. .
.. .
.. .
Introduction to the Mathematics Section
Answer: .7272 Answer: .666 . . . Answer: .222 . . .
.72 or .73 will not .666 will also be 9
will also be correct
be correct correct or 3
or .6 will not be correct) not be correct)
Suggested Approaches with Samples
Most of the following strategies, described and suggested in the multiple-choice section, will also work on grid-in
questions.
■ Circle or underline what you are looking for.
■ Substitute numbers for variables to understand a problem.
■ Try simple numbers to solve a problem.
■ Pull information out of word problems.
■ Draw/sketch diagrams or simple figures.
■ Use your calculator when appropriate to solve a problem.
You should also
■ Make sure that your answer is reasonable.
■ Jot down your scratch work or calculations in the space provided in your test booklet.
■ Approximate or use your calculator to check your answers if time permits.
There are some specific items and strategies that should be noted for grid-in questions:
■ There is no penalty for guessing on grid-in questions. Although it may be difficult to get an answer correct by
simply writing in a wild guess, you should not be afraid to fill in your answer-even if you think it's wrong.
■ Make sure to answer what is being asked. If the question asks for percent and you get an answer of 57%, grid
in 57, not .57. Or if a question asks for dollars and you get an answer of 75 cents, remember that 75 cents is .75
dollar. Grid in .75 not 75.
■ In some questions, more than one answer is possible. Grid in only one answer. If you work out a question and get
the answer x > 5, grid in 6, or 7, or 8 but not more than one of them.
■ Some questions will have a note in parentheses ( ) that says, Disregard the % sign when gridding your answer,or
Disregard the $ sign when gridding your answer.Follow the directions. If your answer is 68%, grid in 68, or if
it's $95, grid in 95.
.. .
.. .
.. .
Part I: Analysis of Exam Areas
Introduction to the Mathematics Section
■ Answers that are mixed numbers such as 3 2
must be changed to improper fractions (3 2
) or
decimals (3 2
= 7.25) before being gridded. Improper fractions or decimals can be gridded. Mixed
numbers cannot. The scoring system cannot distinguish between 3 2
and 2
■ Since you cannot work from answer choices that are given or eliminate given choices, you will have to actually
work out each answer. The use of your calculator on some problems in this section could enhance the speed and
accuracy of your work.
■ Writing in your answer in the space provided at the top of the grid is for your benefit only. It's wise to always
write in your answer, but remember, the grid-in answer is the only one scored. Be sure to grid accurately and
properly.
Following are some sample grid-in questions. Consider for each how you would grid in the answer in the proper places
on the answer sheet. Also consider when it would be appropriate to use a calculator to help you work out problems and
to check the accuracy of your work.
Acceptable Answers
Fraction and decimal forms are acceptable.
Sample
1. If z3
1-= , then z =
To solve for z you could multiply both sides of the equation by the lowest common denominator of 12 to get rid of the
fractions as follows:
1-=cc mm
4z - 3 = 6
z = 4
The correct answer is 4
or 2.25. (Either answer will receive full credit.)
Grid Carefully
Your gridding is what counts. Your written-in answer is for your benefit. Be accurate.
Sample
1. Acme Taxi lists the following rates on its door:
$1.20 for the first 4
mile
$0.90 for each additional 4
mile
$6.00 per hour for waiting
At these rates, if there was a 15-minute wait at the bank, how much will a 1.5-mile taxi trip cost? (Disregard
the $ sign when gridding your answer.)
You should solve the problem as follows:
At $6.00 per hour, a 15-minute ( 4
hour) wait will cost $1.50. The first 4
mile will cost $1.20. The remaining 1 4
, or 4
miles will cost 5(.90) = $4.50. The total bill will be the sum.
The correct answer is $7.20, gridded as 7.20. (You would not get credit for gridding 7.00, 7, 72, or 720, even if you had
written the right answer above the grid circles.)
Answer the Question
Make sure that you answer the question that is being asked. Your answer must be in the units asked for.
Sample
1. If Gina completed 3
2 of her project in 12 days, how many days are needed to do the entire project?
To solve, let n = number of days to complete the project. Then
The question asks for the number of days to complete the project. Therefore, 432 hours or 2 7
weeks would not be correct.
The correct answer is 18.
Grid Only One Answer
Even if more than one answer is possible, grid in only one answer.
Sample
1. If -4x + 12 > -16 and x > 0, then what is one possible integer value for x?
You could solve the problem as follows:
Add -12 to each side
leaving
Part I: Analysis of Exam Areas
Introduction to the Mathematics Section
Dividing each side by (-4) gives
x < 7
(Note: The inequality sign is reversed.)
The correct answer is 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, or 6. (Any of these answers would give you full credit. Do not grid more than one of
them, however.)
Reduced Fractions Not Necessary
Fractions do not have to be reduced as long as they fit into the grid. (You probably should be in the habit of reduc-
ing them anyway, although that's not required here.)
Sample
1. In the preceding parallelogram, if AB = BC = CD = DE, what is the ratio of the area of
triangle ABF + triangle BCF to the area of triangle CDF + triangle DEF?
You could mark the diagram and solve the problem as follows:
In parallelogram AEFG, if all the triangles marked have the same base and they all meet at F (giving them all the same
height because the formula for the area of a triangle is 2
× base × height), then they all have equal areas. Therefore, the
ratio of the area of triangle ABF + triangle BCF to the area of triangle CDF + triangle DEF is 2/2.
The correct answer is 1/1. (A 2/2 answer would also be acceptable because you don't have to reduce fractions.)
G
ECDBA
F
= == =
G
ECDBA
F
Part I: Analysis of Exam Areas
Follow Directions About Signs
Follow directions when you're told to disregard the sign.
Sample
1. A basketball is fully inflated to 24 pounds per square inch. A football is fully inflated to 16 pounds per square
inch. The air pressure in the basketball is what percentage of the air pressure in the football? (Disregard the %
sign when gridding your answer.)
You could have worked the problem as follows:
To compute percentage, simply plug into the formula
of number
is number percentage=
Note that the question reads: The air pressure in the basketball is what percentage of the air pressure in the football?
Therefore,
.5air pressure in football
air pressure in basketball
The correct answer is 150%, which is gridded as 150.
Answers Must Fit Grid
Change your answer into a form to fit the grid if necessary.
Sample
1. A collection of coins consists of 19 quarters, 21 dimes, and 16 nickels. What percentage of the coins is dimes?
(Disregard the % sign when gridding your answer.)
You could solve the problem as follows: There is a total of 56 coins, of which 21 are dimes. The percentage of dimes
(d) is
Set up a ratio:
d
Reduce one side:
d
Cross multiply:
Introduction to the Mathematics Section
Divide by 8:
d
d
The correct answer is 37.5. (Even though your answer could have been 37 2
1 , this answer could not have been placed in
the grid.)
Calculators Can Help
Use the calculator to your advantage. Work out calculations and check your answers.
Samples
1. A speed of 75 miles per hour is approximately equivalent to how many feet per second?
You could solve this problem as follows:
75 miles per hour 1 hour
75 miles=
Since 1 mile = 5280 feet and 1 hour = 60 minutes = 3600 seconds,
1 hour
75 miles
110 feet per second
The correct answer is 110.
2. What is %4
You could solve this question as follows:
of =
c ^
m h
hh
hh
The correct answer is 4.05.
Part I: Analysis of Exam Areas
Bowler Score
3. The preceding chart shows how each of nine bowlers scored in the first game of a bowling tournament. Their
average score was how much greater than their median score?
To find the mean, simply total all scores and divide by 9. This step would give you 1431 ÷ 9 = 159. To find the median,
you must put the scores in order and count to the middle (the fifth spot).
The correct answer is 2.
Introduction to the Mathematics Section
A Summary of Strategies for Grid-In Questions
■ Realize that you receive no penalty for guessing.
■ Know the grid-in rules and procedures.
■ Change mixed numbers to improper fractions or decimals.
■ Understand that fractions and decimal forms are acceptable.
■ Write in your answer at the top, and remember that the grid-in part is scored.
■ Grid accurately and properly.
■ Be sure to answer the question being asked.
■ Grid in only one answer, even if more than one is possible.
■ Know that fractions do not have to be reduced if they fit.
■ Follow directions carefully.
■ Change your answer to fit the grid.
■ Use your calculator.
■ Make sure that your answer is reasonable.
■ Jot down scratch work in the test booklet.
■ Check your answers.
■ Don't get stuck on any one problem!
Charts, Tables, and Graphs
The Mathematics sections of the new SAT also include some questions about charts, tables, and graphs. You should
know how to (1) read and understand information that is given; (2) calculate, analyze, and apply the information given;
and (3) spot trends and predict some future trends. When you encounter a chart, table, or graph, you should
■ Focus on understanding the important information given.
■ Not memorize the information, but rather refer to it when you need to.
■ Review any additional information given with a graph (headings, scale factors, and legends, for example).
■ Read the question and possible choices, noticing key words.
■ Look for obvious large changes, high points, low points, and trends. Obvious information often leads to an answer.
Charts and Tables
Charts and tables are often used to give an organized picture of information, or data. Be sure that you understand what
is given. Column headings and line items show important information. These titles give the numbers meaning.
Part I: Analysis of Exam Areas
Samples
Questions 1 and 2 are based on the following chart:
Burger Sales for the Week of August 8 to August 1 4
Day Hamburgers Cheeseburgers
Wednesday 74 7 1
Thursday 75 72
1. On which day were the most burgers (hamburgers and cheeseburgers) sold?
A. Saturday
B. Monday
C. Thursday
D. Friday
E. Sunday
Working from the answers is probably the easiest method of answering this question:
C. Thursday 75 + 72 = 147
The correct answer is A.
Another method is to approximate the answers.
2. On how many days were more hamburgers sold than cheeseburgers?
A. 7
B. 6
C. 5
E. 3
Hamburgers outsold cheeseburgers every day except Saturday. The correct answer is B.
Introduction to the Mathematics Section
Graphs
Information can be displayed in many ways. The three basic types of graphs you should know are bar graphs, line
graphs, and pie graphs (or pie charts). You should also be familiar with a graph called the scatter plot.
Bar Graphs
Bar graphs convert the information in a chart into separate bars or columns. Some graphs list numbers along one edge
and list places, dates, people, or things (individual categories) along another edge. Always try to determine the relation-
ship between the columns in a graph or chart.
Sample
1. The preceding bar graph shows that Candidate 1 has how many more delegates committed than Candidate 2?
Notice that the graph shows the Number of Delegates Committed to Each Candidate, with the numbers given along the
bottom of the graph in increases of 200. The names are listed along the left side. Candidate 1 has approximately 800
delegates (possibly a few more). The bar graph for Candidate 2 stops about three quarters of the way between 400 and
600. Consider that halfway between 400 and 600 is 500, so Candidate 2 is at about 550:
The correct answer is C.
Line Graphs
Line graphs convert data into points on a grid. These points are then connected to show a relationship among the items,
dates, and times, for example. Notice the slopes of the lines connecting the points. These lines show increases and
decreases. The sharper the slope upward, the greater the increase. The sharper the slope downward, the greater the
decrease. Line graphs can show trends, or changes, in data over a period of time.
Candidate 4
Candidate 1
Candidate 2
Candidate 3
Number of Delegates Committed to Each Candidate
Delegates
Part I: Analysis of Exam Areas
Samples
Questions 1 and 2 are based on the following graph.
1. In which of the following years were there about 500,000 Native Americans?
The information along the left side of the graph shows the number of Native Americans in increases of 100,000. The
bottom of the graph shows the years from 1910 to 1980. Notice that in 1960 about 500,000 Native Americans were in
the United States. Using the edge of a sheet of paper as a straight edge or ruler helps you see that the dot in the 1960
column lines up with 500,000 on the left. The correct answer is D.
2. During which of the following time periods was there a decrease in the Native American population?
Because the slope of the line goes down from 1910 to 1920, there must have been a decrease. If you read the actual
numbers, you will notice a decrease from 300,000 to 250,000. The correct answer is A.
Circle Graphs, or Pie Charts
A circle graph, or pie chart, shows the relationship between the whole circle (100%) and the various slices that repre-
sent portions of that 100%. The larger the slice, the higher the percentage.
Native American Population in the United States from 1910 to 1980
Years
Population
Introduction to the Mathematics Section
Samples
Questions 1 and 2 are based on the following circle graph.
How John spends his monthly paycheck
1. If John receives $100 on this month's paycheck, how much will he put in the bank?
A. $2
John puts 20% of his income in the bank, and 20% of $100 is $20, so he will put $20 in the bank. The correct answer is B.
2. What is the ratio of the amount of money John spends on his hobby to the amount he puts in the bank?
A. 6
B. 2
C. 8
D. 7
E. 4
To answer this question, you must use the information in the graph to make a ratio:
in the bank
his hobby
3== =
Notice that the ratio 15% / 20% reduces to 4
. The correct answer is E.
Scatter Plot
A scatter plot is a graph representing a set of data and showing a relationship or connection between the two quantities
given. The graph is typically placed in one part of a coordinate plane (the upper right quarter, called Quadrant I). When
the data is placed on the scatter plot, usually a relationship can be seen. If the points appear to form a line, a linear rela-
tionship is suggested.
in the bank
car and bike
repair
misc.
items
school
supplies
his hobby
entertainment
Part I: Analysis of Exam Areas
If the line goes up to the right, that is, one quantity increases as another increases, then the relationship is called a posi-
tive correlation. For example:
If the line goes down to the right, that is, one quantity decreases as another increases, then the relationship is called a
negative correlation. For example:
If the data does not appear to show any line or any relationship between the quantities, the scatter plot is said to show
no correlation. For example:
Time spent listening to music
(minutes)
Math test score
(percent right)
Days absent from school
Grade point average
Number of hours studying
Biology test score
(out of 1 00 possible)
A Summary of Strategies
for Charts, Tables, and Graphs
■ Examine the entire graph, noticing labels and headings.
■ Focus on the information given.
■ Look for major changes-high points, low points, and trends.
■ Don't memorize the chart, table, or graph; refer to it.
■ Skimming questions can be helpful.
■ Circle or underline important words in the question.
■ Pay special attention to which part of the chart, table, or graph the question is referring to.
■ If you don't understand the graph, reread the labels and headings.
■ Don't get stuck on any one question!
Introduction to the Mathematics Section
Introduction to the Writing Section-Essay
The writing section of the new SAT requires every student to compose an essay on an assigned topic. This essay assign-
ment will be the first section of the test. The prompt will contain a short paragraph featuring either a single quote or a
pair of quotes about an issue that you are asked to discuss, supporting your ideas with an example or examples from
your reading, personal experiences, or observations. The essay question generates a raw score that ranges from 2-12.
(This raw score is the sum of the scores of two readers who each assign a score of 1-6.) You will have 25 minutes to
complete the essay.
Ability Tested
The essay section of the exam tests your ability to read a topic carefully, to organize your ideas before you write, and to
write a clear, well-written essay.
Basic Skills Necessary
This section requires good high school level writing, reading, and reasoning skills.
Directions
Writing-Essay
Time: 25 minutes
1 Essay Question
You have 25 minutes to plan and write an essay on the topic below. DO NOT WRITE ON ANOTHER TOPIC. AN ESSAY
ON ANOTHER TOPIC WILL NOT BE SCORED.
The essay is intended to give you the chance to show your writing skills. Be sure to express your ideas on the topic
clearly and effectively. The quality of your writing is much more important than the quantity, but to cover the topic ade-
quately, you may want to write more than one paragraph. Be specific.
Your essay must be written on the two lined pages provided. You will not be given any additional paper. If you keep
your handwriting to a reasonable size, write on every line, and avoid wide margins, you should have enough space to
complete your essay.
Directions: Read the following paragraph and assignment carefully. Then prepare and write a persuasive essay. Be sure
to support your reasons with specific examples that will make your essay more effective.
Part I: Analysis of Exam Areas
"Work experience is the best teacher," say many sociologists. With this in mind, some parents encourage their
high school students to get an after-school or weekend job. Other parents cite the importance of getting good
grades to discourage their high school students from getting an after-school or weekend job.
Assignment: Which parents do you agree with? Using an example or examples from your reading, personal experi-
ences, or observations, write an essay to support your position.
THE PROCTOR WILL ANNOUNCE WHEN 25 MINUTES HA VE PASSED. AT THAT TIME, YOU MUST STOP
WRITING. IF YOU FINISH YOUR ESSAY BEFORE 25 MINUTES HA VE PASSED, YOU MAY NOT GO ON TO
ANY OTHER SECTION OF THE EXAM. THE PROCTOR WILL ANNOUNCE WHEN TO START THE NEXT
SECTION.
Analysis of Directions
1. You have 25 minutes to plan and write an essay on one assigned topic. You will have space for writing notes to
help you organize your thoughts. (These notes will not be read by the persons grading your exam.)
2. Notice that this topic, or prompt, features a quote about an issue to which you are asked to respond. It is written
with the intent that you will be able to respond quickly regardless of your background or interests.
3. A topic, or prompt, could feature a pair of quotes (two quotes) about an issue.
4. The assignment will ask you to give your view on a topic. Support your point of view with reasoning and specific
details or examples.
5. Some assignments will include a "gloss" or quick paraphrase of the topic's main idea. This "gloss" is meant to
assist you if you are not familiar with the quote or topic.
6. Spend 3 or 4 minutes making your notes and organizing your thoughts. Spend about 20 minutes writing your
essay. Spend 1 or 2 minutes proofreading your essay.
7. Make sure that the essay you write is on the topic given.
8. The general instructions include the sentence suggesting that "you may want to write more than one paragraph."
This remark is a polite way of saying that if you expect to score well, you had better write more than one para-
graph. Very short essays usually receive very low scores. Aim for at least three paragraphs.
9. Be specific. Your readers are not, as you may suppose, combing your essay for split infinitives. They are looking
for specific details, for concrete evidence of some kind used to support your points.
10. Don't use excessively large writing, don't leave wide margins, and don't skip any lines.
11. Remember: Your essay should be clear and effective.
Scoring the Essay
Your essay will be scored by experienced and trained high school and college teachers who teach English, writing, or
language arts courses. Two teachers will score your essay on a 1-6 scale (6 is the highest score). The two readers will not
know each other's scores. If their scores are more than two points apart, your essay will go to a third reader. The essay
score of 2-12 will be scaled and factored in with the writing multiple-choice sections to give an overall writing skills
score ranging from 200-800.
Analyzing the Scores
Since you have only 25 minutes to plan and write the essay, graders do not allow minor errors of grammar or mechanics
to affect the score. The essays scored at 6 will not be errorless-they are, after all, first drafts-but they will be superior
in content, organization, and development.
Score of 6
These clear and consistently competent essays have only minor errors and are characterized by the following:
■ effective and insightful coverage of the tasks required by the exam question
■ good organization and development, with relevant supporting details
■ command of standard written English with a range of vocabulary and sentence variety
Score of 5
These competent essays have occasional errors or lapses in quality and are characterized by the following:
■ effective coverage of the tasks required by the exam question
■ generally good organization and development, with some supporting details
■ good handling of standard written English with some range of vocabulary and sentence variety
Score of 4
These adequately competent essays have occasional errors or lapses in quality and are characterized by the following:
■ coverage of the tasks required by the exam question
■ adequate organization and development with some supporting details
■ adequate handling of standard written English, but with minimal sentence variety and some grammar or diction
errors
Score of 3
These marginal papers are characterized by the following:
■ failure to fully cover the required tasks
■ weak organization and/or development
■ failure to use relevant supporting detail
■ several errors of grammar, diction, and sentence structure
Score of 2
These inadequate papers are characterized by the following:
■ failure to cover the assignment
■ poor organization and development
■ lack of supporting detail
■ frequent errors of grammar, diction, and sentence structure
Introduction to the Writing Section-Essay
Score of 1
These incompetent papers are characterized by the following:
■ failure to cover the assignment
■ very poor organization and development
■ errors of grammar, diction, and sentence structure so frequent as to interfere with meaning
■ extreme brevity or shortness
There are a number of ways to approach writing a timed essay. If you've been practicing for this part of the exam in
your English class, and you and your teacher are satisfied with the way you handle a 25-minute essay, you can skip
or skim this section and continue to write your essays your way. If you aren't confident with your technique or wish
to review the process with a few successful techniques, then read this section carefully.
Reviewing the Writing Process
For any timed writing task, you should envision three steps leading to the finished product:
1. Preparing to write (prewriting)
2. Writing
3. Proofreading (editing)
Preparing to Write (Prewriting)
Read the topic and the assignment very carefully. Circle or underline key words to help you focus on the assigned
task. Reread the assignment. If there are several tasks given, number them and write them down. Let the nature of the
assignment determine the structure of your essay.
Inventing and organizing information on short notice, given only a few minutes, can be difficult unless you are ready
with an effective technique. Take time to organize your thoughts on paper before writing. The three basic techniques are
brainstorming, clustering, and outlining.
Brainstorming
The process of creating and accumulating ideas and examples is called "brainstorming." Brainstorming is simply jotting
down in the scratch area provided as many thoughts, ideas, and possibilities as you can remember, invent, or otherwise
bring to mind to address the topic. Neatness, order, and spelling do not matter at this point.
After generating as many ideas or examples as you can within a few minutes, assess and organize your notes.
Remember that development relies on specific examples: Decide which examples best enable you to support your
points. Eliminate (cross out) those you don't wish to use, and number those you'll want to address in your response.
Add any notes regarding more specific details or new thoughts that come to mind. However, don't worry about develop-
ing everything completely, because only you use these planning notes. Your time will be better spent developing these
points in your writing and not in your notes.
Part I: Analysis of Exam Areas
Clustering
"Clustering" is a technique well suited to the timed essay. Use clustering as a way of organizing your thoughts before
you write. Clustering provides a way to put all of your thoughts down on paper before you write so that you can quickly
see the structure of the whole paper.
"Work experience is the best teacher," say many sociologists. With this in mind, some parents encourage their
high school students to get an after-school or weekend job. Other parents cite the importance of getting good
grades to discourage their high school students from getting an after-school or weekend job.
Assignment: Which parents do you agree with? Using an example or examples from your reading, personal experi-
ences, or observations, write an essay to support your position.
After you choose a topic, write it down in the prewriting area (given under the actual topic question) and draw a circle
around that topic:
For a few moments, think of all the elements of that side of the issue and connect them to the central topic cluster:
You can then number the parts of the cluster to give an order to your thoughts. You don't have to use all the elements of
your cluster.
For
Working
Enhance
Education
Learn
Skills
Time
Management
Responsibility
Work
Ethic
For
Working
Introduction to the Writing Section-Essay
Outlining
Another technique well suited to the timed essay is the use of a simple, informal outline. A formal outline (using I., II.,
III., A., B., C., etc.) is not recommended and is not necessary. Your outline is meant to help you organize your thoughts
and should be kept simple.
Introduction
Working Beneficial
Learn Skills
Enhance education
Discussion or Body
Learning Skills-Time management
Enhance education-develop good work ethic
Conclusion or Summary
Working depends on student
Students can gain a lot
Notice that this outline is informal, but the basic parts, Introduction, Discussion, and Conclusion, help you focus and
organize your response.
Remember, spend about 3 or 4 minutes prewriting and organizing your ideas before you start writing.
Writing the Essay
Opening Paragraph
A strong opening paragraph is essential for a well-developed response. One easy-to-master, yet extremely effective,
type of introduction is a GENERALIZE-FOCUS-SURVEY structure. In this three- to four-sentence paragraph, the first
sentence generalizes about the given topic, the second sentence focuses on what you have chosen to discuss, and the
last one or two sentences survey the particulars you intend to present.
Remember:
■ Generalize-address the question or topic
■ Focus-state your position
■ Survey-mention the points you will discuss (in order)
An effective first paragraph tells your reader what to expect in the body of the response. The GENERALIZE-FOCUS-
SURVEY paragraph points toward the specifics you will discuss and suggests the order in which you will discuss them.
Body or Discussion
Writing the body of the response involves presenting specific details and examples that relate to the aspects you intro-
duced in the first paragraph. The body may consist of one long paragraph or several short paragraphs. If you choose to
break your discussion into several paragraphs, make sure that each paragraph consists of at least three sentences. Very
short paragraphs may make your response appear insubstantial and scattered.
Be realistic about how much you can write. Although the readers want you to support your points adequately, they un-
derstand that you must write concisely to finish in time. Providing at least one substantial example, or "for instance," is
important for each aspect you discuss in the body of your response.
Part I: Analysis of Exam Areas
Conclusion
As you prepare to write the conclusion, you should pay special attention to time. Having a formal conclusion to your
response is unnecessary, but a conclusion should function to (1) complete your response to the question, (2) add infor-
mation that you failed to introduce earlier, or (3) point toward the future.
Proofreading (Editing)
Always allow a few minutes to proofread your essay for errors in grammar, usage, and spelling. If you detect an error,
either erase it cleanly or simply line it out carefully and insert the correction neatly. Keep in mind, both while you are
writing and while you are correcting, that your handwriting should be legible. Even though readers are instructed to
ignore the quality of handwriting, if the paper is too difficult to read, they may get a negative impression of the essay.
A Specific Approach: The "Why Essay"
One good way to approach a question that asks you to explain, analyze, or evaluate is to use a "why essay" format.
A "why essay" is built around a thesis sentence. The thesis sentence begins with your opinion followed by the word
"because" and then a list of the most important reasons the opinion is valid, reasonable, or well-founded.
For example, using the "work experience" sample topic below, a thesis statement could be:
I think working while in school is beneficial to students because it provides skills that might enhance their formal
education and teaches them a good work ethic.
The thesis statement would come at the end of the introductory paragraph followed by paragraphs that explain each
supporting point. The paper ends with a summary of the reasons and a restatement of the thesis sentence. Each para-
graph should contain approximately three to five sentences.
The introduction invites the reader to read on. The following reasons (three are usually sufficient) should give support-
ing examples or evidence. Your concluding paragraph can summarize your reasons, complete your response to the ques-
tion, add information that you failed to introduce earlier, or point toward the future. You may wish to tie in a restatement
of your thesis sentence.
The "why essay" format looks like the following table in outline form:
Paragraph Number Why Essay Format Examples by Paragraph
1 Introduction-Thesis Sentence Paragraph 1
2 Reason 1 Paragraph 2
3 Reason 2 Paragraph 3
4 Reason 3 Paragraph 4
5 Conclusion Paragraph 5
Now let's take a close look at a sample topic and two sample essays.
Directions: Read the following paragraph and assignment carefully. Then prepare and write a persuasive essay. Be sure
to support your reasons with specific examples that will make your essay more effective.
Introduction to the Writing Section-Essay
"Work experience is the best teacher," say many sociologists. With this in mind, some parents encourage their
high school students to get an after-school or weekend job. Other parents cite the importance of getting good
grades to discourage their high school students from getting an after-school or weekend job.
Assignment:Which parents do you agree with? Using an example or examples from your reading, personal experiences,
or observations, write an essay to support your position.
Two Well-Written Essays (with Comments)
The following two essays were written by students. The papers are reproduced exactly as they were written, so they
contain some mechanical errors and some general writing mistakes. The students wrote the essays within the 25 min-
utes allotted.
Essay 1
Aside from the last paragraph, this is a very good essay, well-organized, well-supported, and specific. Its word choice,
syntax, and mechanics are all competent.
This is a good first paragraph.
It clearly states the writer's
position, and by suggesting that
work can develop nonacademic
skills, it prepares for the
arguments of the next three
paragraphs.
A well-chosen word, but
misspelled. It should
be "supersede."
The writer supports her
argument (that part-time work
develops the ability to
manage time efficiently) by
referring to personal
experience.
The move to a second point
in this paragraph (increased
confidence) would be clearer
with the addition of a
transitional word or phrase
(such as "Further" or "Also")
to begin the sentence. But,
the writer rightly does
include a transitional word
("Additionally") at the
beginning of the next sentence.
Note how the repetition of the
word "skills" links the second
paragraph with the first.
Paragraph three moves on to
another advantage
(development of a work ethic).
The second sentence explains
fully what the writer
understands a "work ethic"
to be.
The last paragraph is the
weakest paragraph of this essay.
The writer has argued forcefully
in favor of after-school work.
There is no reason to weaken
the argument with the trite
suggestion that it will depend
on the individual. What doesn't?
In an argument essay like this,
it is not necessary (and is
usually a waste of time) to pay
lip service to the opposing point
of view.
Part I: Analysis of Exam Areas
Essay 2
Note: Since the question is "what is your opinion," it is quite permissible to write in the first person (I) and give your opin-
ion without saying "in my opinion" or "I believe" or "my viewpoint is." Be personal and invent supporting examples!
Eight Important Points to Consider When Writing
1. Try to be genuinely interested in the topic.
2. Don't worry about the answer you think "they" want you to write.
3. Don't be afraid to be honest.
5. Write naturally.
6. Choose your words with some thought and don't use words with meanings you're unsure about.
7. Don't be afraid to use contractions, figures of speech, even slang, but do so tactfully.
8. Don't be wishy-washy. Be confident as you support your position.
Introduction is focused and
states position clearly
and immediately.
The second paragraph supports
the main position of the
introduction-again supports
the position that jobs can lead
to good grades.
Notice how it uses words
from the counter-argument,
"good grades," to support the
position that part-time jobs
are good because they lead to
good grades.
The third paragraph gives
supporting details from
experience as asked for -
personal experience supports
the position.
The conclusion:
• again restates the
essay topic;
observations to again support
original restated position.
The fourth paragraph shows
that not working in part-time
jobs doesn't mean that good
grades will necessarily follow.
Notice the supporting example
from the experience and
observation of the writer.
Introduction to the Writing Section-Essay
A Few Sample Topics for Practice
Topic 1
Directions: Think carefully about the issue presented in the following quotations and the assignment below.
"Save for a rainy day."
"Sacrificing for the future is fine for many, but for some of us, it may never come. Enjoy the present, for it is the
only thing of which we all are certain."
Assignment: Is it important to save for the future? Plan and write an essay in which you develop your position on this
issue. Use an example or examples from your reading, personal experiences, or observations, to support your position.
Evaluating Your Essay
When you practice, use the following checklist to evaluate the essay:
■ Does the essay focus on the topic and complete the assigned task?
(Circle one: Excellent Average Poor)
■ Is the essay well organized, well developed, and consistent in argument?
(Circle one: Excellent Average Poor)
■ Does the essay use specific supporting details?
(Circle one: Excellent Average Poor)
■ Does the writing use correct grammar, usage, punctuation, and spelling?
(Circle one: Excellent Average Poor)
■ Is the handwriting legible?
(Circle one: Excellent Average Poor)
Topic 2
Directions: Read the following quotation and assignment carefully. Then prepare and write an essay about the issue
presented.
"Genius is one percent inspiration and ninety-nine percent perspiration."
-Thomas Edison
Assignment: Edison suggests that the major contributing factor of genius is hard work as opposed to thoughts and
ideas. Do you agree or disagree with Edison? Using an example or examples from your reading or your personal obser-
vation, write an essay to support your position.
Part I: Analysis of Exam Areas
Evaluating Your Essay
When you practice, use the following checklist to evaluate the essay:
■ Does the essay focus on the topic and complete the assigned task?
(Circle one: Excellent Average Poor)
■ Is the essay well organized, well developed, and consistent in argument?
(Circle one: Excellent Average Poor)
■ Does the essay use specific supporting details?
(Circle one: Excellent Average Poor)
■ Does the writing use correct grammar, usage, punctuation, and spelling?
(Circle one: Excellent Average Poor)
■ Is the handwriting legible?
(Circle one: Excellent Average Poor)
A Summary of Strategies for Essay Writing
■ Spend 3 or 4 minutes making your notes and organizing your thoughts. Spend about 20 minutes writing
your essay. Spend 1 or 2 minutes proofreading your essay.
■ Make sure that the essay you write is on the topic given.
■ The general instructions include the sentence suggesting that "you may want to write more than one
paragraph." Aim for at least three paragraphs.
■ Be specific. Your readers are looking for specific details, for concrete evidence of some kind used to support
your points.
■ Don't use excessively large writing, don't leave wide margins, and don't skip any lines.
■ Your essay should be clear and effective.
■ Know how to use the writing process:
Preparing to Write (Prewriting)
Writing
Proofreading (Editing)
■ Keep the following questions in mind as you write and review your essay:
Does the essay focus on the topic and complete the assigned task?
Is the essay well organized, well developed, and consistent in argument?
Does the essay use specific supporting details?
Does the writing use correct grammar, usage, punctuation, and spelling?
Is the handwriting legible?
Introduction to the Writing Section-Essay
Introduction to the Writing Section-
Multiple Choice
There are three kinds of questions in the multiple-choice writing sections:
■ Identifying Sentence Errors (sometimes called Usage)
■ Improving Sentences (Sentence Correction)
■ Improving Paragraphs (also called Revision in Context)
A typical exam will have two multiple-choice sections-one 25 minutes long and one 10 minutes long. A total of ap-
proximately 18 Identifying Sentence Error questions, approximately 25 Improving Sentence questions, and approxi-
mately 6 Improving Paragraphs questions will be spread between the two multiple-choice sections. The exact number
of questions of each type may vary slightly; the total number of questions is approximately 49.
Common Errors to Watch For
Following is a list of the nearly thirty writing faults that are most likely to appear on the exam. Not all of them will turn
up on the exam, but many of them will. Some of them may appear more than once (such as verb agreement) and some
may appear in both the usage and the sentence correction sections.
The following chart lists the twenty-eight common writing faults most likely to be on the exam. The second column
gives a simple sentence to illustrate the fault (on the exam, unfortunately, the errors will not be nearly so easy to see),
with the error underlined. The third column gives the corrected version of the example.
Type of Error Example of Error Corrected Example
1 . Noun agreement error F rance and Italy are a country in Europe. France and Italy are countries in Europe.
2. Subject-verb agreement error The students of English is taking the test. The students of English are taking the
test.
3. Pronoun agreement error Jack was late, so we left without them. Jack was late, so we left without him.
4. Unclear pronoun reference Jane, June, and Joan applied, and she Jane, June, and Joan applied, and Jane
got the job. got the job. (Joan or June)
5. Missing specific pronoun Dave ate too fast which made him sick. Dave ate too fast so he got sick.
antecedent
6. Change of pronoun subjects One needs a calculator, and you should One needs a calculator, and one should
bring two pens. bring two pens.
7 . Wrong pronoun She is the judge which sentenced the felon. She is the judge who sentenced the felon.
8. Adjective/adverb error His writing is c arelessly because he His writing is careless because he writes
writes too rapid. too rapidly.
9. Comparative adjective error Of the seven swimmers, she is the Of the seven swimmers, she is the
stronger. strongest.
1 0. Misplaced modifier We saw the boy and his mother in a We saw the boy in a Batman costume
Batman costume. and his mother.
(continued)
Part I: Analysis of Exam Areas
Type of Error Example of Error Corrected Example
11 . Dangling modifier Flowing from the mount ain top, he He drank from the stream that was
drank from the stream. flowing from the mountain top.
1 2. Double negative There is hardly no coffee left in the pot. There is hardly any coffee left in the pot.
1 3. Illogical comparison In California, the sun rises later than In California, the sun rises later than in
New York. New York.
1 4. Verb tense sequence error He rang the bell, opened the door, and He rang the bell, opened the door, and
enters the house. entered the house.
1 5. Verb tense error Last week she buys a new car. Last week she bought a new car.
1 6. Change of voice of verb He runs a mile daily, and weights He runs a mile daily and lifts weights.
are lifted by him.
1 7 . Verb form error He has brung a bottle of wine. He brought a bottle of wine.
1 8. Sentence fragment Having thre e sisters, two of them doctors. Having three sisters, two of them doctors,
made her feel better.
1 9. Comma splice She has three sisters, two of them are She has three sisters, and two of them are
doctors. doctors.
20. Fused (or run-on) sentences She has thre e sisters two of them She has three sisters, and two of them
are doctors. are doctors.
21 . Parallelism error He is studying biology, physics, and He is studying biology, physics, and
how to swim. swimming.
22. Coordination error Ames wrote only about Boston, and he Ames wrote only about Boston, although
was never there. he was never there.
23. Subordination error Wilson sets many of his novels in Galway, Wilson sets many of his novels in Galway
and he was born there. where he was born.
24. Diction error He will be relapse d from prison in June. He will be released from prison in June.
25. Idiom error: gerund I am eager in se eing the film. I am eager to see the film.
infinitive confusion He is incapable to answer the question. He is inc apable of answering the question.
26. Idiom error: choice of preposition They are in support to the idea. They are in support of the idea.
27 . Idiom error: choice of conjunction He is as subtle than a fox. He is as subtle as a fox.
28. Wordiness Because of the fact that he failed to Because he failed to give complete
give total and complete attention, attention, he missed the exit.
he missed the exit.
Identifying Sentence Error Questions (Usage)
You should have a total of about 17 to 19 usage questions.
Ability Tested
These questions test your ability to recognize errors in standard written English.
Basic Skills Necessary
Knowledge of some basic grammar and usage will help in this section. Review the rules of correct grammar and usage
that have been emphasized in your high school English classes.
Directions
The following sentences many contain one error of grammar, usage, diction, or idiom. No sentence will contain more
than one error, and some have no error. If there is an error, it will be underlined and have a letter beneath it. Sections of
the sentence that are not underlined cannot be changed. In selecting your answer, observe the requirements of standard
written English. If there is an error, choose the one underlined part that must be changed to correct the sentence. If there
is no error, choose E.
Analysis of Directions
1. In this section, each question is a single complete sentence of fewer than thirty words (and usually fewer than
twenty-five) with four underlined words or phrases lettered A, B, C, and D. A fifth choice, E, is for no error.
2. If there is an error, it will be underlined. Parts of the sentence that are not underlined are correct and cannot be
changed.
3. No sentence will contain more than one error, so if you find an error don't keep looking; simply select the letter
below the error.
4. If you cannot find a clear error in a sentence, do not hesitate to choose E (No Error).
5. Note that you do not have to correct the sentence; simply find the error if there is one.
6. Observe the rules of standard written English.
Suggested Approaches with Samples
The following are examples of the errors most often tested for in Usage or Identifying Sentence Error questions; strate-
gies and explanations are included.
Subject-Verb Agreement Errors
An agreement error is the faulty combination of a singular and a plural, a singular subject and a plural verb or vice
versa. Be sure you can identify the subject and the verb of the sentence. Do not let the intervening words distract you.
Introduction to the Writing Section-Multiple Choice
Samples
1. The short stories of J. California Cooper addresses the black experience with colloquial talk,
dialect, dots, dashes, and even musical notes. No Error.
The subject "stories" is a plural. To agree, the verb should be the plural "address." The correct answer is A.
2. The increase in the number of predators that carry infectious diseases to the herds of zebra and gnu are a serious
concern to the park rangers. No Error.
This is another error of agreement. The subject of the sentence is the singular noun "increase," and its verb, though
widely separated from it, is the plural "are." It should read "the increase...is." The correct answer is C.
Pronoun Agreement Errors
Pronouns can be either singular or plural and must agree with the noun, verb, or other pronoun that they refer to.
Samples
1. The greatest strength of the American political system is each voter's right to determine which way they
will vote. No Error.
The singular "is" agrees with the singular "strength." The plural "they," however, does not agree with the singular "each
voter." The correct answer is C.
2. The governor hopes to increase and redistribute tax money, raising the expenditure on education and
equalizing them throughout the state. No Error.
There are no errors in A, B, or C, but there is an error of agreement in D. The plural pronoun "them" refers to the singu-
lar "expenditure." The corrected sentence would have either "expenditures" and "them" or "expenditure" and "it." The
correct answer is D.
Verb Tense Errors
The tenses (present, past, future) of the verbs in a sentence must be logical and consistent.
Samples
1. When the bell rang, I grabbed my backpack and run as fast as I could to catch the first bus. No Error.
The first two verbs here ("rang," "grabbed") are in the past tense. To be consistent, "run" should be "ran." The correct
answer is B.
Part I: Analysis of Exam Areas
A B
C ED
A B C
ED
A B C
ED
A B C
ED
A B CD E
2. Raul Julia won a Tony award in The Three Penny Opera,and he re-creates his role when the play became an
award-winning film. No Error.
The verb "re-creates" should be "re-created," a past tense. The past tense is necessary to be consistent with the verb
"became." The correct answer is A.
Case Errors
Pronouns in English have three cases: subjective (I, he), possessive (my, his) and objective (me, him). The function of
the pronoun in the sentence determines its case.
Samples
1. When we were in elementary school, there was a competition between my sister and I that now seems
ridiculous. No Error.
The personal pronoun is the object of the preposition "between," so the phrase should be "between my sister and me." It
is easy to see case errors like this when the pronoun immediately follows the preposition (to me, like him, without her),
but it is harder when another object intercedes (to David and me, like Martha and him, with Iris and her). The correct
answer is C.
2. According to the surgeon, the diagnosis of illness was not likely to alarm either she or her husband. No Error.
The object of the infinitive "to alarm" is "she or her husband." The "she" should be the objective "her." The correct
answer is C.
Ambiguous Pronoun Errors
The antecedent of a pronoun (the word the pronoun refers to) should be clear. Sentences in which a pronoun could
have two or more different antecedents should be rewritten.
Samples
1. Many historians believe the Kennedy-Nixon election was decided by the television debate in which he appeared
unshaven and humorless. No Error.
The error is the ambiguous pronoun "he." A reader has no way of knowing whether the antecedent of this pronoun is
Kennedy or Nixon. The correct answer is D.
2. In the 1840s, Dickens wrote the Christmas books The Chimes and The Cricket on the Hearth, but it did not
attain the popularity of A Christmas Carol. No Error.
There are two possible antecedents to the singular "it," The Chimes, and The Cricket on the Hearth. The correct answer
Introduction to the Writing Section-Multiple Choice
A B C
ED
A B CD
E
B C D
E
A
A B C
ED
A B C D E
Parallel Construction Errors
Errors of parallelism occur when two or more linked words or phrases are expressed in different grammatical struc-
tures. Parallelism errors may include unnecessary shifts in verb tenses (past to present, for example) or voice (active
to passive, for example). They may also include shifts in pronouns (you to one, for example ). Watch for these errors
in lists or series.
Samples
1. Miguel enjoyed swimming, weight lifting, and to run. No Error.
"To run" is incorrect; it should be an "-ing" word ("running") like the other items. The correct answer is D.
2. Working at a full-time job,helping to support a family, and a college education added up to a tremendous burden
for Tom. No Error.
An error in parallelism occurs with "a college education," which may be corrected by adding an "-ing" word, "complet-
ing." So the correct, parallel phrase is "completing a college education." The correct answer is C.
3. Law school will not only enable one to pass the bar exam, but also teach you to think clearly. No Error.
The verbs "enable" and "teach" are correctly parallel, but the pronoun shift from "one" to "you" is an error. The correct
answer is C.
Comparison Errors (Illogical Comparisons)
When making a comparison, be sure that the two compared elements are similar. Watch carefully for this error
when a sentence begins with "Like." Note that the omission of necessary words can also make comparisons illogical.
Though wordiness is a fault, some constructions require extra words to be clear and logical. A sentence like "I am
interested in but uninformed about dinosaurs." would be incorrect without both the "in" and the "about."
Samples
1. Like Faulkner, Eudora Welty's stories give the reader a sense of what life in the South must have been like in the
thirties. No Error.
The problem in this sentence is at the beginning. As it now stands, the comparison is not Faulkner and Welty (two authors)
or Faulkner's stories and Welty's fiction (two works), but Faulkner and Welty's stories (a writer and a writer's works). The
corrected sentence would read "Like Faulkner's" or "Like those of Faulkner" or "Like the stories of Faulkner." The correct
answer is A.
Part I: Analysis of Exam Areas
A B CD E
A B CD
E
A B CDE
A B CD
E
2. Because the volcanoes on the island of Hawaii are more active than other islands, it is the center
for geological studies. No Error.
The comparison here is illogical. The sentence compares the more active volcanoes to other islands, not to volcanoes on
the other islands. The corrected sentence would read "more active than those on other islands." The correct answer is B.
3. The organically grown vegetables sold at this market cost much more than the market selling vegetables
grown with pesticides. No Error.
The sentence compares the cost of vegetables with the cost of a market. To make sense, it should read something like
"cost much more than those grown with pesticides," or "cost much more than vegetables grown with pesticides." In sen-
tences with comparisons, look carefully at exactly what two things are compared; be sure the comparison is a logical
one. The correct answer is C.
Other Common Errors
Parts of Speech Errors
Be careful not to confuse adjectives (which modify nouns) with adverbs (which modify adjectives, verbs, and other
adverbs).
Sample
1. The great blue heron has survived because it is difficult to stalk, is not particular tasty, and lacks elegant
plumage. No Error.
The error is the use of the adjective where an adverb is needed; to modify the adjective "tasty," the adjective "particu-
lar" should be replaced by the adverb "particularly." The correct answer is C.
Double Negative Error
Watch for double negatives. Keep in mind that words like "hardly," "never," and "neither" are negatives.
Samples
1. Unaffected by neither hunger nor cold, Scott covered up to twenty miles on each of the days that the weather
permitted him to travel at all. No Error.
The error here is A, a double negative since "Unaffected" and "neither" are both negatives. To correct the usage, change
"unaffected" to "affected" or "neither...nor" to "either...or." Since "Unaffected" is not underlined, choice A must be
changed. The correct answer is A.
Introduction to the Writing Section-Multiple Choice
A B C
D E
A B C
D E
A B C D
A B
C D E
E
2. Many psychologists claim that slips of the tongue do not mask no deeply concealed wishes, but are simply signs
of momentary confusion. No Error.
The error here is the double negative: "do not mask"... "no." The correct answer is B.
Diction Errors
Diction errors (errors in the choice of word) are especially likely to show up with a word that looks or sounds very
much like another: "sit" and "set," or "retain" and "detain," for example.
Samples
1. Setting at her typewriter almost every day for fifty-five years, Agatha Christie completedeighty-six volumes
of prose. No Error.
This is an error of diction, or choice of word. The writer has confused "to sit" (an intransitive verb) and "to set" (a verb
that takes an object). The correct answer is A.
2. By prohibiting discounting by chain stores and supermarkets, British book publishers left smaller private
bookstores become competitive with the larger distributors. No Error.
This is another diction error, confusing "left" and "let." The correct answer is C.
Idiom Errors
Idiom errors are most likely to occur in sentences that require a choice between an infinitive and a gerund; "reluctant
to speak" and "suspected of lying" are correct idioms. The items testing idiom errors will usually involve preposition
choice.
Samples
1. The prosecutor feared the showing of a teleplay based on the defendant's life would make it impossible
in selecting a jury. No Error.
The error is the unidiomatic use of "in selecting" (a preposition followed by a gerund) instead of "to select" (an infini-
tive) after "impossible." The correct answer is D.
2. Researchers have extended the life span of laboratory-grown cells, a featthat may shed light on the process to age.
No Error.
The problem is in the phrase "process to age," a use of the infinitive when the correct idiom is "of aging." The correct
answer is D.
Part I: Analysis of Exam Areas
A B C
D E
A B C
D E
A B C
D E
A B C
D E
A B C D
E
3. Based in Oscar Hijuelos' prize-winning novel, The Mambo Kings has a screenplay by Cynthia Cidres, and stars
Armand Assante. No Error.
The correct preposition idiom here is "based on" or "based upon." The correct answer is A.
Sentences with No Errors
Do not hesitate to choose E when you cannot find a usage error that you are sure about. About one in five questions
in this section of the exam will have no error.
Samples
1. The workers at the American embassy in Moscow have been affected in some way by radio waves, but there is
no certainty about just what the effects have been. No Error.
This is a sentence with no error. The correct answer is E.
2. The popularity of many recent films is due not to their sentiment or morality, but to their violence. No Error.
There is no error in this sentence. The singular "is" agrees with the singular "popularity," while the phrases "not to
their" and "but to their" are correctly parallel. The correct answer is E.
A Summary of Strategies and Key Points
for Identifying Sentence Error Questions
■ Focus on the underlined words or phrases looking for an obvious error.
■ You do not have to correct the sentence; simply find the error if there is one.
■ Remember, if there is an error, it will be underlined. Parts of the sentence that are not underlined are
correct and cannot be changed.
■ Since no sentence will contain more than one error, if you find an error don't keep looking. Simply select
the letter below the error.
■ If you cannot find a clear error in a sentence, do not hesitate to choose E (No Error).
■ Observe the rules of standard written English.
Introduction to the Writing Section-Multiple Choice
A B DC
E
A B
C D E
A B CD E
Part I: Analysis of Exam Areas
Improving Sentences Questions (Sentence Correction)
You will have a total of about 24 to 26 sentence correction questions.
Ability Tested
These questions test your ability to recognize and correct errors in standard written English.
Basic Skills Necessary
Knowledge of some basic grammar, usage, and punctuation will help in this section. Review the rules of correct gram-
mar, usage, and punctuation that have been emphasized in your high school English classes.
Directions
The following questions test correctness and effective expression. In selecting the answer, pay attention to grammar,
diction, sentence structure, and punctuation. In the following questions, part or all of each sentence is underlined. The A
answer repeats the underlined portion of the original sentence, while the next four offer alternatives. Choose the answer
that best expresses the meaning of the original sentence and at the same time is grammatically correct and stylistically
superior. The correct choice should be clear, unambiguous, and concise.
Analysis of Directions
1. This question type presents a single sentence with all or part of it underlined.
2. The five lettered choices present five possible versions of the underlined part.
3. The rest of the sentence that is not underlined cannot be changed and must be used to determine which of the five
answers is the best.
4. The first choice, A, repeats the original version, while the next four make changes.
5. Sometimes the original sentence is better than the four proposed alternatives. If you find no error and you feel the
original sentence is best, select choice A.
6. Note that the correct choice should be clear, unambiguous, and concise.
Suggested Approaches with Samples
The sentences in this section of the test may have one or more of the same kind of errors found in the Identifying
Sentence Errors (Usage) section.
The following are errors that are tested most frequently in the Improving Sentences section of the exam.
Misplaced Modifiers Errors, Dangling Phrases
Since a misplaced part is often awkward but not, strictly speaking, a grammatical error, the questions testing for
misplaced parts will usually ask you to select the sentence that is not only grammatically correct, but also clear and
exact, free from awkwardness and ambiguity. Watch for sentences that seem odd or have unnatural word order.
Also watch for phrases that have nothing to modify; they are called "dangling modifiers."
Samples
1. When she was only five, Janet's mother married for the third time.
A. When she was only five, Janet's mother married for the third time.
B. When only five, Janet's mother married for the third time.
C. When Janet was only five, her mother married for the third time.
D. When Janet's mother married for the third time, she was only five.
E. Janet's mother married, when Janet was only five, for the third time.
The major problem in this sentence is the uncertainty about whom the "when she was only five" clause modifies, five-
year-old Janet, or her mother. In choices A and D, the "she" appears to refer to the mother, while choice B, though the
pronoun is missing, also seems to make the marrying mother five years old. Both C and E remove the ambiguity. In the
choice between these two sentences, C is preferable, since E places the phrase "for the third time" awkwardly away
from the verb "married," which it modifies. The correct answer is C.
2. Reacting to a false report of dangerous pesticides, the cranberry harvest of 1999 went unsold to the nation's
consumers.
A. the cranberry harvest of 1999 went unsold to the nation's consumers.
B. the cranberry harvest of 1999 was not bought by the nation's consumers.
C. the nation's consumers do not buy the cranberry harvest in 1999.
D. the nation's consumers refused to buy the cranberry harvest of 1999.
E. the 1999 harvest of cranberries was not bought by the nation's consumers.
The participle that begins this sentence dangles; that is, it is placed to modify "the cranberry harvest," but it should be
next to "consumers." It is the consumers, not the harvest, who reacted. Choice C avoids the dangling participle, but
changes the past tense of the verb to the present. The correct answer is D.
3. The caribou herds, for centuries, have supported the Gwich'in Indians which migrate to feed in their summer
range beside the Beaufort Sea.
A. The caribou herds, for centuries, have supported the Gwich'in Indians
B. For centuries, the caribou herds have supported the Gwich'in Indians
C. The caribou herds which have for centuries supported the Gwich'in Indians
D. The Gwich'in Indians have been supported by the caribou herds for centuries
E. For centuries, the Gwich'in Indians have been supported by the caribou herds,
Keep related words and phrases as close together as possible. The trouble with this sentence is a misplaced modifier;
the clause about migrating to a summer range modifies the caribou, not the Indians. The best version will place herds
as close to the "which" as possible. Choice C has no main verb. The correct answer is E.
4. Using Christian, West African, and Taino traditions, ancient images are re-created in rare rain forest woods by
George Crespo.
A. ancient images are re-created in rare rain-forest woods by George Crespo.
B. rare rain-forest woods re-create ancient images by George Crespo.
C. George Crespo re-creates ancient images in rare rain-forest woods.
D. George Crespo is the creator of ancient images in rain-forest woods.
E. George Crespo re-creating ancient images of rare rain-forest woods.
Introduction to the Writing Section-Multiple Choice
When, like this one, a sentence begins with a participle, be on the alert for a dangling participle. Here it is the artist,
Crespo, not the carvings, who uses the three traditions. Choices C, D, and E avoid the dangling modifier, but E has no
main verb, and D is wordier than C and changes "re-creates" to "creates." The correct answer is C.
Parallel Construction Errors
Be especially careful with sentences that use correlatives (both . . . and; no . . . but; not only . . . but also; not . . . but;
either . . . or; and others). Make sure that the construction that follows the second of the correlative conjunctions is
like the construction that follows the first.
Samples
1. After he graduated from college, his parents gave him a new car, ten thousand dollars, and sent him on a trip
around the world.
A. After he graduated from college, his parents gave him a new car, ten thousand dollars, and sent him on a
B. After graduating from college, his parents gave him a new car, ten thousand dollars, and a
C. After he had graduated from college, his parents gave him a new car, ten thousand dollars, and a
D. After he had graduated from college, his parents gave him a new car, ten thousand dollars, and sent him on a
E. After graduating from college, his parents gave him a new car, ten thousand dollars, and sent him on a
The problem in the original sentence is parallelism. The verb "gave" begins a series with nouns as objects ("car,"
"dollars") but the third part of the series ("and sent him on") interrupts the series. Choices B and C correct this error
by making "trip" a third object of "gave." Choice B cannot be right because it begins with a dangling participle;
it appears that the parents are graduating from college. The correct answer is C.
2. To prune a rose is more dangerous than pruning an azalea.
A. To prune a rose is more dangerous than pruning an azalea.
B. Pruning a rose is more dangerous than pruning an azalea.
C. To prune a rose is more dangerous than azalea pruning.
D. It is much more dangerous to prune a rose than it is to prune an azalea.
E. Pruning a rose is more dangerous than to prune an azalea.
The object here is to make the verbs on either side of the "than" parallel. You can use two infinitives ("to prune," "to
prune") or two gerunds ("pruning," "pruning"), but not one of each as in choices A, C, and E. Choice D has the correct
verb parallels, but changes the meaning. The correct answer is B.
3. Please remind me not only that I must cash a check, but also to have the car washed.
A. that I must cash a check, but also to have the car washed.
B. that I must cash a check, but also to wash the car.
C. to cash a check, but also that the car needs washing.
D. to cash a check, but also that I must have the car washed.
E. to cash a check, but also to have the car washed.
The correlative here are "not only...but also." Choice E is the only answer that correctly uses a parallel construction
("not only to cash," "but also to have"). The correct answer is E.
Part I: Analysis of Exam Areas
Introduction to the Writing Section-Multiple Choice
Ambiguous Pronoun Errors
In the Identifying Sentence Errors section of the test there are ambiguous pronouns with more than one possible
antecedent. In this part of the exam, the more common error is an ambiguous pronoun with no specific antecedent.
You can correct this error by eliminating the pronoun or by supplying a specific antecedent, but not by substituting
a different pronoun.
Samples
1. The whooping crane population has increased from only fifteen to about two hundred, which is one of
conservation's most encouraging stories.
A. which is one of conservation's most encouraging stories.
B. which is one the most encouraging stories in conservation.
C. and this is one of conservation's most encouraging stories.
D. and this growth is one of conservation's most encouraging stories.
E. and that appears to be encouraging to conservationists.
If it is possible, a pronoun should have a specific antecedent. In this sentence, choice D provides a noun as subject of
the clause to replace the pronouns "which," "this," and "that." Changing the pronoun from "which" to "this" or "that,"
does nothing to correct the ambiguity of the pronoun. The correct answer is D.
2. I came in fifteen minutes late which made the whole class difficult to understand.
A. I came in fifteen minutes late which
B. I came in fifteen minutes late, and this
C. I came in fifteen minutes late, and this is what
D. By coming in fifteen minutes late, which
E. Coming in fifteen minutes late
The pronoun "which" has no specific antecedent here, and the change of "which" to "this" does not correct the prob-
lem. Choice E eliminates the pronoun altogether and corrects the sentence. Choice D is a sentence fragment. The cor-
rect answer is E.
3. Ending the hope that a single genetic flaw might cause Alzheimer's disease, they say the disorder apparently has
multiple causes, as do heart disease and cancer.
A. they say the disorder apparently has multiple causes
B. they say the disease has multiple apparent causes
C. they say that it apparently has multiple causes
D. researchers report the disease has many causes, apparent
E. researchers report the disorder apparently has multiple causes
The vague "they" is the problem here. They who? Choices D and E replace the inexact pronoun with a specific noun.
There is no important difference between "many" and "multiple," but E uses "apparently" correctly. The correct answer
is E.
Pronoun Agreement Errors
Watch for change of pronoun subjects. If the pronoun "one" is used in a sentence, then the pronoun "you" should
not be used (sometimes called parallel construction errors). Also make sure that the pronoun agrees in number
(singular, plural) with the noun it represents.
Samples
1. When one reaches the first plateau, it does not guarantee that you will complete the climb to the summit.
A. When one reaches the first plateau, it
B. Because one reaches the first plateau, it
C. One's reaching the first plateau
D. That you have reached the first plateau
E. Reaching the first plateau
There is an inconsistency in the pronouns in this sentence. The part that cannot be changed uses "you," but the under-
lined section uses "one." A right answer will either use "you" or get rid of the pronoun altogether. Choices A, B, and C
cannot be right, but D and E are both grammatically correct. In this case E is preferable because it is more direct.
2. Weaver's policy allowed a slave to earn cash if they were able to produce more than the average expected output
each week.
A. if they were able to produce
B. if they produced
C. if they overproduced
D. by producing
E. producing
The error in choices A, B, and C is an agreement error; "slave" is singular, but the pronoun in all three is the plural
"they." Choice D solves the problem by omitting the pronoun. The original meaning is unclear if the preposition "by"
is dropped. The correct answer is D.
Verb Errors
There are many types of verb errors. Verb tense errors, verb sequence errors, change of voice errors, and subject-
verb agreement errors are a few to watch for.
Samples
1. Four financial analysts prepare a summary of stock market activity each week, and it is broadcast by them on
public radio.
A. each week, and it is broadcast by them
B. each week, and then it is broadcast
C. each week and it is broadcast by them
D. each week, and they broadcast it
E. broadcasting each week
Part I: Analysis of Exam Areas
Introduction to the Writing Section-Multiple Choice
The first clause of the sentence uses a verb in the active voice ("prepare"), but the second clause uses a passive ("is
broadcast"). Choice D uses active verbs in both parts of the sentence, while A, B, and C keep the passive. C is also a
run-on sentence. E is briefer but it loses some of the meaning of the sentence. The correct answer is D.
2. Using highly seasoned onions, green peppers, and celery in almost all of their recipes, Creole cooking had
achieved a popularity throughout the country.
A. Creole cooking had
B. Creole cooking has
C. Creole cooking have
D. Creole cooks has
E. Creole cooks have
The participle "using" should modify a plural noun, since the phrase also refers to "their recipes." Since "cooks" is
plural, the plural verb "have" is the choice. The correct answer is E.
Connective Errors
Read two-part sentences carefully to be sure that the one or two words that connect the two parts (words like "but"
or "and") indicate the relationship of the parts clearly.
Samples
1. According to the critics, the MTV awards ceremony was tasteless, according to the audience, it was better
than ever.
A. was tasteless, according to
B. was tasteless according to
C. was tasteless, and according to
D. was tasteless, but according to
E. was tasteless but to
There are two independent clauses here. They can be two separate sentences, or one sentence with either a semicolon or
a conjunction and a comma. A and B leave the conjunction out, and E leaves out the comma. The punctuation is correct
in C and D, but D is a better choice, since the two halves of the sentence contrast, and "but" denotes a contrary idea to
follow. The correct answer is D.
2. Artist Christina Fernandez originally chose painting as her primary medium, as she now works chiefly in still
photography and video.
A. as she now works chiefly
B. seeing as she now works chiefly
C. working chiefly now
D. but she now works chiefly
E. because she now chiefly works
The two parts of the original sentence lack proper coordination. The two parts present a difference, which only the con-
junction "but" makes clear. What the sentence is saying is x was true in the past, but is so no longer. The correct answer
is D.
Sentence Fragments
Make sure that the answer you choose makes a complete sentence.
Sample
1. By the early eleventh century, Muslim scientists knowing the rich medical literature of ancient Greece, as well as
arithmetic and algebra.
A. knowing the rich medical literature of ancient Greece, as well as
B. knew the rich medical literature of ancient Greece, as well as
C. know the rich medical literature of ancient Greece, as well as
D. having learned the rich medical literature of ancient Greece, as well as
E. having been given knowledge of the rich medical literature of ancient Greece, as well as
As it stands, this is a sentence fragment, with a participle ("knowing") but no main verb. B supplies the missing verb.
C eliminates the sentence fragment, but uses the present tense where past tense is required. D and E are just participles
in a different tense. The correct answer is B.
Punctuation Errors
Look carefully at the punctuation. Before you begin, be sure to know the proper use of the comma and semicolon.
Samples
1. Each year about fifty thousand books are published in Great Britain, that is as many as in the four-times-larger
United States.
A. published in Great Britain, that is as many as in
B. published in Great Britain; that is as many as in
C. published in Great Britain; as many as in
D. published in Great Britain; which is as many as in
E. published in Great Britain as many as in
The error in the original sentence is the comma splice-joining the two independent clauses (or complete sentences)
with just a comma. Correct the error by using a period, a comma with a conjunction, or, as here, a semicolon. Though C
and D use semicolons, they no longer have independent second clauses, while E, which has made the second clause
dependent, omits the comma. The correct answer is B.
2. George Eliot did not begin to write fiction until she was nearly forty, this late start accounts for the maturity of
even her earliest works.
A. forty, this
B. forty this
C. forty, and this
D. forty, a
E. forty, such a
This is a comma splice. It can be corrected by changing the comma to a semicolon, or by adding a conjunction like
"and" in C. The correct answer is C.
Part I: Analysis of Exam Areas
Introduction to the Writing Section-Multiple Choice
3. In 1858, John Speke looked over the waters of Lake Victoria he insisted that it was the source of the Nile.
A. Lake Victoria he insisted that it was
B. Lake Victoria and he insisted it to be
C. Lake Victoria and he insisted that they were
D. Lake Victoria; insisting that they were
E. Lake Victoria; he insisted that it was
The sentence is a fused or run-on sentence, joining two independent clauses with no punctuation or conjunctions. B and
C add conjunctions, but fail to add the needed commas. D adds a semicolon, but makes the second clause dependent.
Only E avoids a punctuation error. The correct answer is E.
Idiom Errors
As mentioned earlier, idiom errors are most likely to occur in sentences that require a choice between an infinitive
and a gerund; "reluctant to speak" and "suspected of lying" are correct idioms. Most of the items testing idioms will
usually involve preposition choice.
Sample
1. Exercising without proper warm-ups can be as harmful to the body as if you didn't exercise at all.
A. as if you didn't exercise at all.
B. as no exercise at all.
C. than not exercising at all.
D. than no exercise.
E. as your not getting any exercise at all.
The idiom to use with the construction "as-adjective-... " is "as-adjective-as." B is better than A because it is shorter and
does not change from a third person to a second person subject ("exercising" to "you"). The correct answer is B.
Wordiness
Sometimes, after eliminating three of the choices that are wrong, you will be left with two grammatically correct
sentences. In this case, look for wordiness in one of the two and choose the other one.
Samples
1. The Prado museum in Madrid has the largest collection of great Spanish paintings in the whole world.
A. The Prado museum in Madrid has the largest collection of great Spanish paintings in the whole world.
B. The Prado museum in Madrid has the world's largest collection of great Spanish paintings.
C. It is the Prado museum in Madrid that has the largest collection of the world's great Spanish paintings.
D. The greatest collection of Spanish paintings in the world is held by the Prado museum in Madrid.
E. In Madrid, it is the Prado museum that holds the world's largest collection of great Spanish paintings.
Although the original version is not ungrammatical, B is less wordy, replacing "in the whole world" with the more eco-
nomical "the world's." C and E add the unnecessary "it is," while D uses the passive voice, always more wordy than the
active. The correct answer is B.
Part I: Analysis of Exam Areas
2. Inhaling hot, steamy air to treat a cold will not make it better, while possibly making it worse.
A. better, while possibly making it worse.
B. better, and it may even make it worse.
C. better, making it worse, possibly.
D. better, even worsening it, perhaps.
E. better, and it may even get worse than it is.
Choice B replaces the subordinated participial phrase with a clear independent clause coordinated by "and." E also has
an independent clause, but it is more wordy than B. The correct answer is B.
Sentences with More than One Error
Many of the questions in this section of the test have several errors. The usual strategy in the answers is to give one
choice that keeps both errors, and two others that correct only one of the two mistakes. Sometimes a choice will in-
troduce a new kind of error. Be sure the answer you choose is grammatical, clear, and like the original in meaning.
Sample
1. The strike cannot be settled until the growers agree to improve health-care benefits and improving the workers'
housing.
A. and improving the workers' housing.
B. and improving worker housing as well.
C. and to improve the workers' housing.
D. and the workers' housing.
E. and also to the improvement of the housing of the workers.
The phrases "to improve health-care benefits" and "improving the workers' housing" are repetitive and not parallel.
Choice B is wordy and not parallel. Choice C corrects the parallelism error, but not the repetition. Choice E is wordy.
Choice D is brief and grammatical. The correct answer is D.
Sentences with No Errors
If you carefully read the original sentence a few times and just can't spot an error, there might not be one. Don't be
afraid to select no error (choice A), if the original seems correct.
Samples
1. When swimming for Northwestern, Debbie Holm set records that lasted for ten years.
A. Debbie Holm set records that lasted for ten years.
B. the records Debbie Holm set lasted ten years.
C. ten-year records were set by Debbie Holm.
D. the records of Debbie Holm lasted ten years.
E. Debbie Holm's records lasted ten years.
Introduction to the Writing Section-Multiple Choice
The phrase that begins this sentence has an understood but unwritten subject-the person who was swimming at
Northwestern. The phrase will dangle unless this subject follows the comma. Only A puts the understood subject
immediately after this phrase. Choices B, C, D, and E all make it look as if the "records" were the swimmers.
The correct answer is A.
2. Carlos Fuentes sees Columbus' arrival in America not as a cultural catastrophe, but as a seminal event in a tragic
and triumphant history.
A. not as a cultural catastrophe, but as a seminal event
B. not as a cultural catastrophe, but it is a seminal event
C. not as a cultural catastrophe, as a
D. as a seminal event, not as a cultural catastrophe
E. was not a cultural catastrophe, but it was a seminal event
The original version of the sentence is correct. The correlative conjunctions "not...but" should be followed by parallel
constructions. There are parallelism errors in B and E. Choice C loses the contrast pointed by the use of "but." Choice D
changes the meaning by separating "seminal event" from the phrase that completes it, "in a tragic and triumphant history."
The correct answer is A.
A Summary of Strategies and Key Points
for Improving Sentences Questions
■ Focus on the underlined sentence or underlined part of the sentence.
■ Remember, the rest of the sentence that is not underlined cannot be changed and must be used to
determine which of the five answers is the best.
■ The five lettered choices present five possible versions of the underlined part. The first choice, A, repeats
the original version, while the next four make changes.
■ Watch for errors in the choices and eliminate those choices.
■ Sometimes the original sentence is better than the four proposed alternatives. If you find no error and you
feel the original sentence is best, select choice A.
■ Note that the correct choice should be clear, unambiguous, and concise.
■ Observe the rules of standard written English.
Improving Paragraphs Questions (Revision in Context)
In this section of the exam, there are one or two sets of questions based on short samples of student writing. As a rule,
each selection is about three paragraphs and about two hundred to three hundred words long. There are about four to
seven questions on each passage.
Ability Tested
These questions test your ability to recognize and correct errors and revise paragraphs following the guidelines of stan-
dard written English.
Basic Skills Necessary
Applying basic grammar, sentence structure, and usage skills will help in this section. Another important skill involves
the ability to deal with the organization, development, and language in a paragraph or complete essay. Review the rules
of correct grammar and usage that have been emphasized in your high school English classes. Also review the elements
of an outstanding essay.
Directions
The following passages are early drafts of student essays. Some parts of them need to be revised.
Read the selections carefully and answer the questions that follow. There will be questions about sentence structure,
diction, and usage in individual sentences or parts of sentences. Other questions will deal with the whole essay or para-
graphs and ask you to decide about the organization, development, and appropriate language. Choose the answer that
follows the requirements of standard written English and most effectively expresses the intended meanings.
Analysis of Directions
1. Typically, one or two of the questions will ask you to combine two or three sentences.
2. One question may ask you to recognize and correct a usage error.
3. Other questions will deal with a variety of topics that arise from the selection.
4. There may be questions on sentence structure, on transitions from sentence to sentence or paragraph to paragraph,
on the organization of the passage or a paragraph, on logic, on clarity, on rhetorical strategy, or on verbosity.
5. Some questions that deal with the whole essay or with individual paragraphs will focus on organization, develop-
ment, and appropriate language.
6. Note the requirements of standard written English.
7. Keep in mind that the best answer is one that will most effectively express the intended meaning.
A Special Look at Sentence Combining
Let's take a closer look at sentence combining since about one-third or more of the questions may ask you to revise and
combine sentences from a sample of student writing. Though your revision choices will be influenced by the rest of the
paragraph, you can practice the technique with two or three sentences that are not part of a paragraph or essay.
The sentences the exam will ask you to work with will probably be grammatically correct, but they will be choppy,
or wordy, or dull. There may be a series of very short sentences: "Iris is twenty. She is getting married in June. She is
designing a dress. It is white." Or the sentences may be mindlessly coordinated: "Iris is twenty, and she is getting
married in June, and she is designing a dress, and the dress is white." Your combined and revised version might read
like this: "Twenty-year-old Iris is designing a white dress for her June wedding."
Part I: Analysis of Exam Areas
Introduction to the Writing Section-Multiple Choice
The purpose of sentence combining is to clarify the relationship between thoughts and to eliminate wordiness or chop-
piness. The techniques the exam questions will call for most often are coordination and subordination. To coordinate
is to make equal; to subordinate is to place in a less important position. The parts of speech used to control sentence
elements in these ways are the coordinating and subordinating conjunctions.
Coordinating Conjunctions
and
but
for
nor
so
yet
Subordinating Conjunctions
after
although
as
as...as
as if
as long as
as soon as
as though
because
before
despite
how
if
in order that
provided that
since
so...as
so that
than
that
though
unless
until
when
whenever
where
wherever
whereupon
while
why
The best way to begin a problem in combining sentences is to determine which thought you wish to emphasize. If the
two ideas are equally significant, use the coordinating conjunction that best expresses their relationship. If one idea is
more important, subordinate the other. If you have not already done so in your English class, practice different ways of
combining sentences, especially sentences that seem awkward to you. It will help you on the multiple-choice section of
the exam and will improve your writing.
On the exam, you may find a question which asks you to select the best coordinating or subordinating conjunction. The
sentence-combining questions appear in two forms. In one, part of the end of one sentence and part of the beginning of
the next will be underlined, and you will be given five revisions to choose from. In the second type, the question will
ask for the best way to revise and combine two or three complete sentences from the passage.
Suggested Approaches with Samples
Following are two sets of Improving Paragraphs questions based on two separate passages from student essays. The
question types are noted in these samples to help you focus on what to look for. Strategies are included with explana-
tions of questions.
Questions 1-5 are based on the following passage.
(1) Is a man or a woman more likely to ask questions? (2) I think it depends on what the circumstances are and on who is
around when a time to ask questions comes along. (3) In my family, my mother and I ask more questions than my brother or
my father when all our family is together. (4) My father would never ask for directions when we're in the car, and this is
when he is not sure of the way. (5) My mother would stop right away to ask, unless she was in an unsafe neighborhood.
(6) My brother tells me that he asks questions in school, and when he is at work after school, he doesn't. (7) It is be-
cause he thinks his boss will think he doesn't know his job. (8) He won't ask any questions at all. (9) At work he will ask
questions only to his friend, Eddie. (10) Based on my brother and my father, men are more likely to not ask when they
don't know something because they think it will hurt their image as able to do things well. (11) Women are more practi-
cal and will not drive around not knowing where you are.
Part I: Analysis of Exam Areas
Best Version Questions
1. Which of the following is the best version of the underlined portion of sentence 2 (reproduced below)?
I think it depends on what the circumstances are and on who is around when a time to ask questions comes
along.
A. Leave it as it is.
B. on the circumstances.
C. on what the circumstances are and who is around at the time.
D. on the circumstances and who is around when a time to ask questions comes along,
E. on what the circumstances and the situation are for asking questions.
Since the word "circumstances" really includes "who is around," or "situation," there is no need to say more than what
is said in B. All of the other choices are, by comparison, wordy. The correct answer is B.
2. Which of the following is the best version of the underlined portion of sentence 4 (reproduced below)?
My father would never ask for directions when we're in the car, and this is when he is not sure of the way.
A. Leave it as it is.
B. car, and at a time when he is not sure
C. car, even if he is not sure
D. car, when he may not be sure
E. car, because he is not sure
This section of the exam is likely to ask a question that depends on the careful choice of the right conjunctions. Here,
the use of "even if" is both concise and fully expressive. The correct answer is C.
Revise and Combine Sentences
3. Which of the following is the best way to revise and combine sentences 7, 8, and 9 (reproduced below)?
It is because he thinks his boss will think he doesn't know his job. He won't ask any questions at all.
At work he will ask questions only to his friend, Eddie.
A. Because he thinks his boss will think he doesn't know his job, he won't ask any questions at work unless he
asks questions to his only friend, Eddie.
B. At work, he will ask only his friend Eddie questions, otherwise his boss will think he doesn't know his job.
C. He won't ask any questions at work at all, unless he asks his friend Eddie, because he thinks his boss will
think he doesn't know his job.
D. Because he doesn't want his boss to think he doesn't know his job, he won't ask any questions at all at
work, but he will ask his friend Eddie questions.
E. He will ask his friend at work, Eddie, questions, but not his boss, who will think he doesn't know his job.
In questions requiring sentence combining, try to avoid the repetition of words or phrases, like "ask" and "questions"
here. Choices A and D repeat both words, and choice C repeats "ask." The word order of the first clause of choice E is
awkward. The best choice is B-the shortest and the clearest version. The correct answer is B.
Introduction to the Writing Section-Multiple Choice
Phrases that Should Follow
4. Which of the following phrases should follow "Based on my brother and my father" in sentence 10?
A. Leave it as it is.
B. it is more likely that men
C. my opinion is that men are more likely
D. men, unlike women are more likely
E. men are probably more likely
The problem in this sentence is the opening phrase will dangle unless it is followed by something that is "based on ...."
The writer's opinion, not men, is based on her father and brother. The correct answer is C.
Technique Employed by Writer
5. The writer of this passage employs all of the following EXCEPT
A. development of a contrast
B. employment of specific examples
C. chronological organization
D. raising and answering a question
E. reference to personal opinions
The writer contrasts men and women, using examples from her family. The passage opens with a question which the
rest of the two paragraphs attempt to answer. Sentence 10, for example, is a personal opinion. The passage does not use
a chronological organization. The correct answer is C.
Questions 6-10 are based on the following passage.
(1) Many people think that they have insomnia. (2) If they haven't had eight hours of sleep, they think they have in-
somnia. (3) There is no evidence to support the common belief that you have to have eight hours of sleep every night. (4)
Some people sleep as little as two hours a night. (5) They wake up the next morning, and they feel fine. (6) Some people
need only five hours of sleep. (7) Some people must have more than eight hours of sleep to feel refreshed. (8) It is harder
to keep track of time in a dark room than in the daylight. (9) It is easy to overestimate how long you have been awake, or
underestimate how long you have been asleep.
Best Version
6. As an introduction to the content of the paragraph as a whole, which of the following is the best version of the
first sentence?
A. Leave it as it is.
B. Many people have insomnia.
C. Many people think they have insomnia, but they may be mistaken.
D. Why do so many people think that they have insomnia?
E. Is less than eight hours of sleep a sign of insomnia, as many believe?
As it stands, the first sentence raises questions about the content of the paragraph. Does it mean they do have insomnia
or that they only think they do? Most of the paragraph-which is desperately in need of revision-is about the diffi-
culty in determining what insomnia is, and why it is hard to define. Of the five possibilities, C does the best job of
preparing a reader for the rest of the paragraph. B misleads the reader, and D and E ask questions the paragraph will not
answer. The correct answer is C.
Part I: Analysis of Exam Areas
Combining Sentences
7. Which of the following is the best way to combine sentences 1 and 2 (reproduced below)?
Many people think that they have insomnia. If they haven't had eight hours of sleep, they think they have
insomnia.
A. Many people think that they have insomnia; if they haven't had eight hours of sleep, they think they have
insomnia.
B. If they haven't had eight hours of sleep, there are many people who think they have insomnia.
C. Many people haven't had eight hours sleep, and they think they have insomnia.
D. Many people, when they haven't had eight hours sleep, think they have insomnia.
E. Many people who haven't had eight hours of sleep are the ones who think they have insomnia.
When combining sentences, try to consolidate words that are repeated once or twice. Here, the redundant phrase is
"they think that they have insomnia." Choice B adds the unneeded "there are," and uses "they" twice. Choice C uses
"they" twice, and choice E adds the wordy "are the ones who." The correct answer is D.
Best Version
8. Which of the following is the best version of the underlined parts of sentences 4 and 5 (reproduced below)?
Some people sleep as little as two hours a night. They wake up the next morning, and they feel fine.
A. night; they wake up the next morning, and they feel fine.
B. night, waking up the next morning and they feel fine.
C. night, and they feel fine waking up the next morning.
D. night, but they wake up the next morning and feel fine.
E. night, yet wake up the next morning feeling fine.
Avoid the repetition of words. Here, the repeated "they" can be cut in A, B, C, and D. Since the sentences imply a con-
trast, the conjunctions "yet" or "but" are better than the "and." The correct answer is E.
Combining Sentences
9. All of the following pairs of sentences would probably be improved by being combined EXCEPT
A. 1 and 2
B. 2 and 3
C. 4 and 5
D. 6 and 7
E. 8 and 9
All of these pairs could be combined except sentences 2 and 3. Combining these sentences would greatly improve the
writing. The correct answer is B.
Introduction to the Writing Section-Multiple Choice
Replacing Sentences
10 . Which of the following would be the best replacement of sentences 8 and 9 (reproduced below) to make the
conclusion of the paragraph more coherent?
It is harder to keep track of time in a dark room than in the daylight. It is easy to overestimate how long
you have been awake or underestimate how long you have been asleep.
A. Because the number of hours asleep is difficult to estimate, many people have slept more than they think,
and do not really need more.
B. It is harder to keep track of time in a dark room than in the daylight; it is easy to overestimate how long
you have been awake or underestimate how long you have been asleep.
C. Because it is hard to keep track of time in the dark, people cannot really tell how long they have been asleep.
D. Insomniacs cannot really tell how long they have slept.
E. Insomniacs are more likely to overestimate their sleeplessness than to underestimate it.
The paragraph has moved from the varied number of hours of sleep people require to a slightly different topic: the diffi-
culty of determining how long one has slept. Choices A, D, and E add new information not included in the original sen-
tences. B is as wordy and unpointed as the original. Choice C is at least more concise and attempts to relate the idea to
the difficulty of deciding what insomnia is, the notion hidden beneath the writing of the paragraph. The correct answer
is C.
A Summary of Strategies and Key Points
for Improving Paragraphs Questions
■ Read the passage carefully, but don't get stuck on errors in the passage. The errors are intentional for later
questions.
■ Typically, one or two of the questions will ask you to combine two or three sentences.
■ One question may ask you to recognize and correct a usage error.
■ Other questions will deal with a variety of topics that arise from the selection.
■ There may be questions on sentence structure, on transitions from sentence to sentence or paragraph to
paragraph, on the organization of the passage or a paragraph, on logic, on clarity, on rhetorical strategy, or
on verbosity.
■ Some questions that deal with the whole essay or with individual paragraphs will focus on organization,
development, and appropriate language.
■ Keep in mind that the best answer is one that will most effectively express the intended meaning.
■ Observe the rules of standard written English.
PRPR AACTICTI CCE-RE-R EVIEVI EW-EW-
ANALANALYYZZE-PRE-PR AACTICTI CCEE
TThrehre e Full-Length Practice Te Full-Length Practice T estsests
This section contains three simulated full-length practice new SAT tests. The practice tests are
followed by complete answers, explanations, and analysis techniques. The format, levels of diffi-
culty, question structure, and number of questions are similar to those on the new SAT. Since
the test is new, the number and order of question types may vary.
The SAT is copyrighted and may not be duplicated, and these questions are not taken directly
from the actual tests or released sample problems. The sections in these practice exams are
labeled by subject for your convenience in reviewing. They are not labeled on the actual SAT.
When you take these exams, try to simulate the test conditions by following the time allotments
carefully.
PART I I
Answer Sheets for Practice Test 1
(Remove These Sheets and Use Them to Write Your Essay and Mark Your Answers)
Section 1
Begin your essay on this page and continue on the next page if necessary. Do not write outside the essay boxes provided.
Section 2 Section 3 Section 4 Section 5
Section 6
.. .
.. .
.. .
A EDCB
A EDCB
A EDCB
A EDCB
A EDCB
10 A EDCB
A EDCB
A EDCB
A EDCB
A EDCB
A EDCB
A EDCB
A EDCB
A EDCB
A EDCB
A EDCB
A EDCB
A EDCB
A EDCB
A EDCB
A EDCB
A EDCB
A EDCB
A EDCB
A EDCB
A EDCB
A EDCB
A EDCB
A EDCB
A EDCB
A EDCB
A EDCB
A EDCB
A EDCB
A EDCB
A EDCB
A EDCB
A EDCB
A EDCB
A EDCB
A EDCB
A EDCB
A EDCB
A EDCB
A EDCB
A EDCB
A EDCB
A EDCB
A EDCB
A EDCB
A EDCB
A EDCB
A EDCB
A EDCB
A EDCB
A EDCB
A EDCB
A EDCB
A EDCB
A EDCB
A EDCB
A EDCB
A EDCB
A EDCB
A EDCB
A EDCB
A EDCB
35 A EDCB
A EDCB
A EDCB
A EDCB
A EDCB
A EDCB
A EDCB
A EDCB
A EDCB
A EDCB
A EDCB
A EDCB
A EDCB
A EDCB
A EDCB
A EDCB
A EDCB
A EDCB
A EDCB
A EDCB
A EDCB
A EDCB
A EDCB
A EDCB
A EDCB
A EDCB
A EDCB
A EDCB
A EDCB
A EDCB
A EDCB
A EDCB
A EDCB
A EDCB
A EDCB
A EDCB
A EDCB
A EDCB
A EDCB
A EDCB
A EDCB
A EDCB
A EDCB
A EDCB
A EDCB
A EDCB
A EDCB
A EDCB
A EDCB
A EDCB
A EDCB
A EDCB
A EDCB
Section 6 (continued)
Section 7 Section 8 Section 9 Section 10
A EDCB
A EDCB
A EDCB
A EDCB
A EDCB
A EDCB
A EDCB
A EDCB
A EDCB
A EDCB
A EDCB
A EDCB
A EDCB
A EDCB
A EDCB
A EDCB
A EDCB
A EDCB
A EDCB
A EDCB
A EDCB
A EDCB
A EDCB
A EDCB
A EDCB
A EDCB
A EDCB
A EDCB
A EDCB
A EDCB
A EDCB
A EDCB
A EDCB
A EDCB
A EDCB
A EDCB
A EDCB
A EDCB
A EDCB
A EDCB
A EDCB
A EDCB
A EDCB
A EDCB
A EDCB
A EDCB
A EDCB
A EDCB
A EDCB
A EDCB
A EDCB
A EDCB
A EDCB
A EDCB
A EDCB
A EDCB
A EDCB
A EDCB
A EDCB
A EDCB
A EDCB
A EDCB
A EDCB
A EDCB
A EDCB
.. .
.. .
.. .
.. .
.. .
.. .
.. .
Practice Test 1
Section 1: Writing-Essay
Time: 25 Minutes
1 Essay Question
You have 25 minutes to plan and write an essay on the topic below. DO NOT WRITE ON ANOTHER TOPIC. AN ESSAY
ON ANOTHER TOPIC WILL NOT BE SCORED.
The essay is intended to give you the chance to show your writing skills. Be sure to express your ideas on the topic
clearly and effectively. The quality of your writing is much more important than the quantity, but to cover the topic ade-
quately, you may want to write more than one paragraph. Be specific.
Your essay must be written on the two lined pages provided. You will not be given any additional paper. If you keep
your handwriting to a reasonable size, write on every line, and avoid wide margins, you should have enough space to
complete your essay.
Directions: Read the following paragraph and assignment carefully. Then prepare and write a persuasive essay. Be sure
to support your reasons with specific examples that will make your essay more effective.
When Alexander Pope wrote, "A little learning is a dangerous thing," he was not recommending ignorance.
His point is that incomplete or superficial knowledge may be harmful, especially if it encourages an unjustified
certainty in private or public life.
Assignment: Using an example or examples from your reading or your personal observation, write an essay to support
or to refute this paragraph.
THE PROCTOR WILL ANNOUNCE WHEN 25 MINUTES HA VE PASSED. AT THAT TIME, YOU MUST STOP
WRITING. IF YOU FINISH YOUR ESSAY BEFORE 25 MINUTES HA VE PASSED, YOU MAY NOT GO ON TO
ANY OTHER SECTION OF THE EXAM. THE PROCTOR WILL ANNOUNCE WHEN TO START THE NEXT
SECTION.
1. Loved and hated by thousands, Dr. Lucy Bertram
to become surgeon general.
A. controversial
B. popular
C. successful
D. well-trained
E. professional
2. Over thousands of years, organisms have
A. administered
B. evolved
C. organized
D. questioned
E. considered
3. My cat is a creature of contradictions:
alert.
A. aloof . . . dreamy
B. cruel . . . shrewd
C. quiet . . . lively
D. selfish . . . nimble
E. loving . . . sly
30 minutes longer than the scheduled class time.
A. Famous . . . evinced
B. Renowned . . . overturned
C. Notorious . . . verified
D. Illustrious . . . rebutted
E. Eminent . . . established
5. If Senator Montana runs for reelection next year,
she will have the money-raising advantage of the
A. campaigner
B. favorite
C. underdog
D. incumbent
E. candidate
obtained a private loan that enabled him to
partners and emerge free of debt.
A. pledge . . . increase
B. surety . . . augment
C. collateral . . . discharge
D. profit . . . eliminate
E. deposit . . . endorse
Part II: Practice-Review-Analyze-Practice
Section 2: Critical Reading
Time: 25 Minutes
28 Questions
In this section, choose the best answer for each question and blacken the corresponding space on the answer sheet.
Directions: Each blank in the following sentences indicates that something has been omitted. Consider the lettered
words beneath the sentence and choose the word or set of words that best fits the whole sentence.
EXAMPLE:
continent.
A. impoverished
B. successful
C. populous
D. developed
E. militant
The correct answer is C.
7. The absurdist as opposed to the heroic treatment
of war reached maturity in Catch-22, and the
Vietnam War made this approach, which seemed
write about that conflict.
A. banal
B. radical
C. plausible
D. cozy
E. familiar
8. Because the issue is so insignificant, it was
surprising that the disagreement among city
A. tepid
B. slovenly
C. trivial
D. acrimonious
E. genial
because its musicians were young, avant-garde
jazzmen, while its lead singer crooned
A. progressive . . . romantic
B. old-fashioned . . . unique
C. inconsistent . . . conservative
D. unmusical . . . familiar
E. predictable . . . melodic
placed an ace in her sleeve while Rance shuffled
the cards.
A. brazenly
B. overtly
C. furtively
D. hopefully
E. eagerly
Practice Test 1
Practice Test 1
GO ON TO THE NEXT PAGE
Questions 11-12 are based on the following passage.
The doctrine of association has been the basis
for explaining how one idea leads to another.
Aristotle provided the basic law: association by
contiguity. Seeing a shotgun may remind you of a
murder, or it may remind you of a hunting experi-
ence in Wyoming, depending on your history. When
you hear the word "table" you think of chair (or
bench or Formica or something else in your his-
tory), carrots make you think of peas (or Bugs
Bunny or vitamins) and so on. In each case, you
experienced the two items contiguously in the
same place or at the same time or both and they be-
came linked in your mind. In psychology, word as-
sociation tests are based on contiguity, the idea
being that your response to a particular word is
based on your personal history.
11. The author of the paragraph would agree with
which of the following statements?
A. No one thing is necessarily associated with
any other particular thing.
B. Aristotle posited associations which have
become part of the modern experience.
C. Some associations are fixed and
unchangeable.
D. Culture determines what associations a
person makes.
E. Word association is a poor test because
people's associations vary so much.
12 . Which of the following examples most strengthens
the main point of the paragraph?
A. Some people are able to experience more
than two items contiguously.
B. The smell of coffee makes everyone think of
breakfast.
C. Aristotle's writing is full of unexplained
associations.
D. People who make uncommon associations
are often mentally disturbed, whereas people
who make overly predictable associations
lack creativity.
E. Some Londoners who endured German
bombings in World War II are still frightened
by loud noises.
Questions 13-14 are based on the following passage.
Like many birds, the monarch butterfly is migra-
tory. Each year more than 100 million of the insects
fly from their summer homes in the north to areas in
the south. Unlike migratory animals who learn their
routes from their parents or other members of the
species, the life span of monarchs is 90 days or less;
an older generation cannot instruct a younger one.
Not one of the insects that flew north in the spring is
alive to fly south in the fall. Insect ecologists have
recently established that monarchs use the position
of the sun to determine their direction. It may also
be that the butterflies can sense the force lines of the
earth's magnetic field to use as a navigational aid, or
that they find directional clues in the changing
length of the days.
13 . According to information in the paragraph, which
of the following do butterflies use to help them
find their way when they migrate?
A. the prevailing winds
B. one generation's teaching the next
C. the position of the sun
D. force lines of the earth's magnetic field
E. the changing length of days and nights
14 . Of the following general statements, which is best
supported by the paragraph?
A. Scientists have been unable to explain
completely how monarch butterflies migrate
successfully.
B. Butterflies and other insects would be unable
to navigate on cloudy days.
C. Smaller animals like insects depend more on
instincts than larger animals.
D. Scientists know more about larger land and
sea animals than they do about insects like
the monarch butterfly.
E. Scientists will never be able to explain how
butterflies can find their way over long
distances.
Part II: Practice-Review-Analyze-Practice
Directions: Questions follow each of the passages below. Using only the stated or implied information in each passage
and in its introduction, if any, answer the questions.
Questions 15-20 are based on the following passage.
The following passage is from a book about Paul Gauguin,
the late 19th century artist who left France to live and
paint on the Pacific island of Tahiti.
Gauguin decided to settle in Mataiea, some
forty-five kilometers from Papeete, probably on the
advice of a Tahitian chief whom he had befriended.
There he rented a native-style oval bamboo hut,
roofed with pandanu leaves. Once settled, he was
in a position to begin work in earnest and to tackle
serious figure studies. It was probably soon after
this that he painted Vahine no te tiare, his first por-
trait of a Tahitian model.
By the late summer of 1892 the completed can-
vas was back in Paris, hanging in the Goupil gallery.
From the many subsequent references to this image
in his correspondence, it is clear that Gauguin set
considerable store by his "Tahitienne" and, by send-
ing her on ahead to Paris, wanted her to serve as an
ambassadress for the further images of Tahitian
women he would be bringing back with him on his
return. He pressed his male friends for their reac-
tions to the girl, rather than to the picture, anxious to
know whether they, like him, would be responsive
to the beauty of her face: "And her forehead," he
later wrote, "with the majesty of upsweeping lines,
reminded me of that saying of Poe's, 'There is no
perfect beauty without a certain singularity in the
proportions.'" No one, it seems, was quite attuned
to his emotional perception: while Aurier was en-
thusiastic, excited by the picture's rarity value,
Schuffenecker was somewhat taken aback by the
painting's lack of Symbolist character. Indeed, apart
from the imaginary floral background which harked
back to Gauguin's 1888 Self-Portrait,the image is a
relatively straightforward one. Recent anthropologi-
cal work, backed by the use of photography, had
scientifically characterized the physical distinctions
between the different races, distinctions that in the
past had been imperfectly understood. Generally
speaking, artists before Gauguin's time had repre-
sented Tahitians as idealized types, adjusting their
features and proportions to accord with European
taste. This meant that hitherto the Tahitian in
Western art could scarcely be distinguished from
his African or Asian counterpart.
Unfortunately, Charles Giraud's paintings have
disappeared, so we cannot compare them with
Gauguin's, but this first image by Gauguin suggests a
desire to portray the Tahitian physiognomy naturalis-
tically, without the blinkers of preconceived rules of
beauty laid down by a classical culture. Naturalism as
an artistic creed, though, was anathema to Gauguin;
it made the artist a lackey of science and knowledge
rather than a god-like creator. He wanted to go be-
yond empirical observation of this kind, to find a way
of painting Tahiti that would accord with his
Symbolist aspirations, that would embody the feel-
ings he had about the place and the poetic image he
carried with him of the island's mysterious past.
15 . In line 13, the word "correspondence" means
A. correlation.
B. agreement.
C. conformity.
D. similarity.
E. letters.
16 . Gauguin found the faces of Tahitian women
beautiful because of their
A. elegant coloration.
B. unusual proportions.
C. refusal to wear makeup.
D. dark hair covering the forehead.
E. openness and innocence.
17. The passage suggests that a painter depicting a
Tahitian in a period sometime before Gauguin
would probably
A. rely on photographs for models.
B. make an image that was not in accord with
European ideals of female beauty.
C. paint a picture that employed a symbolic
landscape as background.
D. fail to differentiate a Tahitian from the
inhabitants of Asian countries.
E. paint only models who were fully clothed in
Western-style costume.
18 . It can be inferred that the author would like to see
the lost paintings of Charles Giraud in order to
A. determine whether they presented the
Tahitians realistically.
B. determine whether they were better paintings
than Gauguin's.
C. determine whether they deserve their high
reputation.
D. compare the symbolism of these paintings
with that of Gauguin's.
E. discover what subjects Giraud chose to paint.
Practice Test 1
Practice Test 1
GO ON TO THE NEXT PAGE
19 . Of the following phrases, which does the author
use to refer to the aspect of Gauguin's art that
attempts to depict the real world accurately?
I. "the image is a relatively straightforward
one" (lines 31-32)
II. "desire to portray the Tahitian physiognomy
naturalistically" (lines 46-47)
III. "a way of painting Tahiti that would accord
with his Symbolist aspirations" (lines 52-54)
A. II only
B. III only
C. I and II only
D. I and III only
E. I, II, and III
20. The passage suggests that an important problem
Gauguin would have to deal with in his paintings
of Tahiti was how to
A. reconcile his naturalistic and symbolistic
impulses.
B. make Europeans understand the beauty of
Tahiti.
C. find the necessary supplies in a remote
location.
D. earn enough money to support himself by
selling his paintings in Paris.
E. make artistic use of the new advances in
photography.
Questions 21-28 are based on the following passage.
Jim Hansen, a climatologist at NASA's Goddard
Space Institute, is convinced that the earth's tem-
perature is rising and places the blame on the
buildup of greenhouse gases in the atmosphere.
Unconvinced, John Sununu, former White House
chief of staff, doubts that the warming will be great
enough to produce a serious threat and fears that
measures to reduce the emissions would throw a
wrench into the gears that drive the United States'
troubled economy. The stakes in this debate are
extremely high, for it pits society's short-term well-
being against the future of all the planet's inhabi-
tants. Our past transgressions have altered major
portions of the earth's surface, but the effects have
been limited. Now we can foresee the possibility
that to satisfy the energy needs of an expanding hu-
man population, we will rapidly change the climate
of the entire planet, with consequences for even the
most remote and unspoiled regions of the globe.
The notion that certain gases could warm the
planet is not new. In 1896 Svante Arrhenius, a
Swedish chemist, resolved the long-standing ques-
tion of how the earth's atmosphere could maintain
the planet's relatively warm temperature when the
oxygen and nitrogen that make up 99 percent of the
atmosphere do not absorb any of the heat escaping
as infrared radiation from the earth's surface into
space. He discovered that even the small amounts
of carbon dioxide in the atmosphere could absorb
large amounts of heat. Furthermore, he reasoned
that the burning of coal, oil, and natural gas could
eventually release enough carbon dioxide to warm
the earth. Hansen and most other climatologists
agree that enough greenhouse gases have accumu-
lated in the atmosphere to make Arrhenius's pre-
diction come true. Burning fossil fuels is not the
only problem; a fifth of our emissions of carbon
dioxide now come from clearing and burning
forests. Scientists are also tracking a host of other
greenhouse gases that emanate from a variety of
human activities; the warming effect of methane,
chlorofluorocarbons, and nitrous oxide combined
equals that of carbon dioxide.
Although the current warming from these gases
may be difficult to detect against the background
noise of natural climate variation, most climatolo-
gists are certain that as the gases continue to accu-
mulate, increases in the earth's temperature will
become evident even to skeptics. The battle lines
for this particular skirmish are surprisingly well
balanced. Those with concerns about global warm-
ing point to the recent report from the United
Nations Intergovernmental Plan on Climate
Change, which suggests that with "business as
usual," emissions of carbon dioxide by the year
2025 will be 25 percent greater than previously es-
timated. On the other side, the George C. Marshall
Institute, a conservative think tank, published a re-
port warning that without greenhouse gases to
warm things up, the world would become cool in
the next century. Stephen Schneider, a leading
computer modeler of future climate change, ac-
cused Sununu of "brandishing the [Marshall] re-
port as if he were holding a crucifix to repel a
vampire."
If the reality of global warming were put on
trial, each side would have trouble making its case.
Jim Hansen's side could not prove beyond a rea-
sonable doubt that carbon dioxide and the other
greenhouse gases have warmed the planet. But nei-
ther could John Sununu's side prove beyond a rea-
sonable doubt that the warming expected from
greenhouse gases has not occurred.
Part II: Practice-Review-Analyze-Practice
21. The purpose of the first paragraph (lines 1-19) of
the passage is to
A. argue for the reduction of greenhouse gases
in the atmosphere.
B. defend on economic grounds the reduction of
greenhouse gases.
C. present two opposing positions on the
subject of the earth's rising temperature.
D. lessen the concern of the public about the
alleged buildup of greenhouse gases.
E. introduce the two most important spokesmen
for and against ecological reforms.
22. In the first paragraph in line 11, the word "pits"
means
A. removes the core of.
B. sets in competition.
C. depresses.
D. marks with small scars.
E. hardens.
23. From the information in the second paragraph of
the passage, you can infer that a planet
A. whose atmosphere was made up entirely of
oxygen would be warmer than a planet
equally distant from the sun with an
atmosphere made up entirely of nitrogen.
B. whose atmosphere was made up entirely of
nitrogen would be warmer than a planet
equally distant from the sun with an
atmosphere made up entirely of oxygen.
C. with a larger amount of carbon dioxide in its
atmosphere, other factors being equal, will
be warmer than a planet with less carbon
dioxide.
D. with a small amount of carbon dioxide in its
atmosphere cannot increase this amount.
E. with little infrared radiation escaping from
its surface is likely to be extremely cold.
24. The passage implies that a greenhouse gas is one that
I. forms a large part of the earth's atmosphere.
II. absorbs heat escaping from the earth's surface.
III. can be formed by the clearing and burning of
forests.
A. III only
B. I and II only
C. I and III only
D. II and III only
E. I, II, and III
25. From the passage, it can be inferred that all the
following are greenhouse gases EXCEPT
A. nitrogen.
B. carbon dioxide.
C. methane.
D. chlorofluorocarbons.
E. nitrous oxide.
26. Which of the following, if true, would call into
question the argument of the Marshall report?
I. Since the earth's climate did not grow colder
in the five hundred years since 1400 when the
amount of greenhouse gases released by
humans was small, there is no reason to
expect a decrease in temperature when the
amounts of gas released are now much larger.
II. The radical reduction of the emission of
greenhouse gases will result in massive
unemployment throughout the industrial
world.
III. Some scientific studies have shown that the
temperature of the earth is unaffected by the
presence of oxygen in the atmosphere.
A. I only
B. II only
C. I and II only
D. I and III only
E. I, II, and III
Practice Test 1
Practice Test 1
GO ON TO THE NEXT PAGE
27. The word "skeptics" in line 49 most nearly means
A. scientists.
B. ecologists.
C. opponents.
D. doubters.
E. politicians.
28. Stephen Schneider probably referred to Sununu's
"brandishing the [Marshall] report as if he were
holding a crucifix to repel a vampire" in order to
I. amuse his audience.
II. suggest that Sununu's claims are
melodramatic.
III. imply that the idea that greenhouse gases are
dangerous is as imaginary as a vampire.
A. III only
B. I and II only
C. I and III only
D. II and III only
E. I, II, and III
Part II: Practice-Review-Analyze-Practice
IF YOU FINISH BEFORE TIME IS CALLED, CHECK YOUR WORK ON THIS
SECTION ONLY . DO NOT WORK ON ANY OTHER SECTION IN THE TEST. STOP
Practice Test 1
Practice Test 1
GO ON TO THE NEXT PAGE
Section 3: Mathematics
Time: 25 Minutes
20 Questions
Directions: Solve each problem in this section by using the information given and your own mathematical calcula-
tions, insights, and problem-solving skills. Then select the one correct answer of the five choices given and mark the
corresponding circle on your answer sheet. Use the available space on the page for your scratch work.
Notes
1. All numbers used are real numbers.
2. Calculators may be used.
3. Some problems may be accompanied by figures or diagrams. These figures are drawn as accurately as possible
EXCEPT when it is stated in a specific problem that a figure is not drawn to scale. The figures and diagrams are
meant to provide information useful in solving the problem or problems. Unless otherwise stated, all figures and
diagrams lie in a plane.
Data That Can Be Used for Reference
rectangle
A = lw
Area
triangle
circle
rectangular solid
V = lwh
Volume
right circular cylinder
Pythagorean Relationship
Special T riangles
A circle is composed of 360°
A straight angle measures 180°
The sum of the angles of a triangle is 180°
w
l
h
b
r
M
r
h
l
h
w
a2 + b2 = c 2
C B
A
c
a
b
x
x
1. If 5
1 of a number is 2, what is 2
1 of the number?
B. 5
C. 3
D. 2
E. 1
2. If a store purchases several items for $1.80 per
dozen and sells them at 3 for $0.85, what is the
store's profit on 6 dozen of these items?
3. If x = -1, then x4 + x3 + x2 + x - 3 =
B. -7
C. -3
D. -2
E. 1
4. If P is the set of prime numbers less than 10 and Q
is the set of odd integers between 2 and 8, what is
the union of sets P and Q?
A. {3, 5, 7}
B. {2, 3, 5, 7}
C. {3, 5, 7, 9}
D. {2, 3, 5, 7, 9}
E. {1, 2, 3, 5, 7}
Part II: Practice-Review-Analyze-Practice
5. If ,fx x f 35 3 then
x
=+ =^^hh
6. The symbol 7 represents a binary operation
defined as ab a b
7 =+ . What is the value of
237--^^ hh ?
B. 1
C. 0
D. -1
Note: Figure not drawn to scale.
7. In the preceding figure, AB = AD and BD = CD. If
degrees?
8. Angela has nickels and dimes in her pocket. She
has twice as many dimes as nickels. What is the
best expression of the amount of money she has in
cents if x equals the number of nickels she has?
B. 10x + 5(2x)
C. x + 2x
D. 5(3x)
E. 20(x + 5)
B
D CA
Practice Test 1
Practice Test 1
GO ON TO THE NEXT PAGE
9. If x - 4 = y, what must (y - x)3 equal?
10 . The length of a rectangle is 3x, and its perimeter is
10x + 8. What is the width of the rectangle?
A. 2x + 4
B. 2x + 8
C. 4x + 8
D. 4x + 4
E. 5x + 4
10= - , then x =
12 . A car travels 140 miles in 4 hours, while the return
trip takes 3 2
hours. What is the average speed in
miles per hour for the entire trip?
Part II: Practice-Review-Analyze-Practice
13 . If a > b, and ab > 0, which of the following must
be true?
I. a > 0
II. b > 0
III. a/b > 0
A. I only
B. II only
C. III only
D. I and II only
E. I and III only
14 . What is the slope of the line passing through the
points (-3, 5) and (2, 9)?
A. -4
B. 4
C. 5
D. 5
E. 4
15 . Which of the following is equal to xy
xy
eo ?
A. xy
B. xy
C. y
x
D. y
x
E. y
x
16 . In circle O above, XY is a diameter, OX = 8.5, and
YZ = 15. What is the area of /H17005XYZ in square units?
Z
O
X
Y
y
x
Practice Test 1
Practice Test 1
GO ON TO THE NEXT PAGE
17. A bag contains 20 gumballs. If there are 8 red, 7
white, and 5 green, what is the minimum number
of gumballs one must pick from the bag to be
assured of one of each color?
B. 9
C. 8
D. 6
E. 3
18 . If the five vowels are repeated continuously in the
pattern a, e, i, o, u, a, e, i, o, u, and so on, what
vowel will the 327th letter be?
A. a
B. e
C. i
D. o
E. u
19 . The base of an isosceles triangle exceeds each of
the equal sides by 8 feet. If the perimeter is 89
feet, what is the length of the base in feet?
20. What is the area of a rhombus with a perimeter of
40 and a diagonal of 10?
Part II: Practice-Review-Analyze-Practice
IF YOU FINISH BEFORE TIME IS CALLED, CHECK YOUR WORK ON THIS
SECTION ONLY . DO NOT WORK ON ANY OTHER SECTION IN THE TEST. STOP
1. Some players have no trouble seeing the
weaknesses in other people's game and they are
quite unable to see faults of their own.
A. in other people's game and they
B. in other games and they
C. in other players' games, and they
D. in other people's game, but they
E. in other games, but they
2. The Socialist Party is now powerful enough to
worry the governing Christian Democrats, and
they may win fifty seats in the next election.
A. and they may win
B. and they might win
C. and the Socialists may win
D. and the party
E. winning
3. The Medical Board is supposed to protect
consumers from incompetent, grossly negligent,
unlicensed, and unethical practitioners.
A. incompetent, grossly negligent, unlicensed,
and unethical practitioners.
B. incompetent, grossly negligent practitioners
who are unlicensed or unethical.
C. the incompetent and grossly negligent who
practice without ethics or a license.
D. incompetent practitioners, gross and
negligent, unlicensed and unethical.
E. those practitioners who are incompetent,
grossly negligent, unlicensed, and unethical.
4. The wall is a continually evolving work of art, it is
a forum for messages against violence, war, and
cruelty.
A. art, it is a
B. art; it is a
C. art, in that it is a
D. art it is a
E. art a forum
Practice Test 1
Practice Test 1
GO ON TO THE NEXT PAGE
Section 4: Writing-Multiple Choice
Time: 25 Minutes
35 Questions
In this section, choose the best answer for each question and blacken the corresponding space on the answer sheet.
Directions: The following questions test correctness and effective expression. In selecting the answer, pay attention to
grammar, diction, sentence structure, and punctuation. In the following questions, part or all of each sentence is under-
lined. The A answer repeats the underlined portion of the original sentence, while the next four offer alternatives.
Choose the answer that best expresses the meaning of the original sentence, and at the same time is grammatically
correct, and stylistically superior. The correct choice should be clear, unambiguous, and concise.
EXAMPLE:
The forecaster predicted rain and the sky was clear.
A. rain and the sky was clear.
B. rain but the sky was clear.
C. rain the sky was clear.
D. rain, but the sky was clear.
E. rain being as the sky was clear.
The correct answer is D.
5. Before 1984, Australia had a strong tradition of
private medical care, but even conservatives now
accepting the national health care plan.
A. medical care, but even conservatives now
accepting
B. medical care; but even conservatives now
accepting
C. medical care, but now with even
conservatives accepting
D. medical care, conservatives now accepting
E. medical care, but now even conservatives
accept
6. In the play, great care is given to present the
workers' oppression, and the author is uninterested
in the psychology of his characters.
A. great care is given to present the workers'
oppression, and the author is uninterested
B. great care is given to present the workers'
oppression, but the author is uninterested
C. great care is given to the presentation of the
workers' oppression, but the author is
uninterested
D. the author takes great care to present the
workers' oppression, but is uninterested
E. the author is very careful to present the
workers' oppression, and he is uninterested
7. Twenty-five thousand troops went to Somalia, and
they failed to disarm the warring clans and failed
to create a secure environment.
A. Twenty-five thousand troops went to
Somalia, and they failed to disarm the
warring clans and failed
B. Twenty-five thousand troops went to
Somalia, but they failed to disarm the
warring clans and so they failed
C. Twenty-five thousand troops went to
Somalia, but they failed to disarm the
warring clans and
D. Twenty-five thousand troops went to
Somalia, failing to disarm the warring
clans and failing
E. There were twenty-five thousand troops who
went to Somalia, and they failed to disarm
the warring clans, also failing
Part II: Practice-Review-Analyze-Practice
8. The owners hired my husband and I to
manage the inn because we had more experience
than the other applicants. No Error.
9. Pistachios imported from Asia cost more than
the orchards of California but they are larger
and have more flavor. No Error.
10 . There are in the House and Senate general
agreement about the farm bill, but they are far
from agreeing about the budget. No Error.
11. Early tomorrow morning, weather permitting,
he departed on an around-the-state run to
raise money for the disabled. No Error.
12 . When they had completed the lay-out
of the paper's front page, the editors
considered the problems of the sports page.
No Error.
13 . The volleyball players which arrived for
the team picture in the uniforms that they
had worn to practice were irritable and tired.
No Error.
14 . The soil conditions beneath structures may cause
more worse damage in an earthquake than the
temblor itself. No Error.
15 . The debate appeared to be stalemated, since
there was no possibility of the conservatives'
conceding with their opponents' offer
to compromise. No Error.
Practice Test 1
Practice Test 1
GO ON TO THE NEXT PAGE
AB C D
E
Directions: The following sentences may contain one error of grammar, usage, diction, or idiom. No sentence will
contain more than one error, and some have no error. If there is an error, it will be underlined with a letter. Sections of
the sentence that are not underlined cannot be changed. In selecting your answer, observe the requirements of standard
written English. If there is an error, choose the one underlined part that must be changed to correct the sentence. If there
is no error, choose E.
EXAMPLE:
The film tell the story of a cavalry captain and his wife who try to rebuild their lives after the Civil War.
No Error.
The correct answer is A.
A
BC
DE
A B
CD
E
A
B C
D E
A
BC
DE
A
B
D
E
C
A
B
C D
E
A
BC
DE
A
B
C
DE
16 . The region is so dry that there are hardly any
animals, and scarcely no plant life in the dunes.
No Error.
17. Either the allied bombing or the subsequent
Iraqi attempt to quell the Shiite uprising
are responsible for the damage to the shrines.
No Error.
18 . Japanese defense policy was changed completely
when the Socialist Party scrapped its age-old
insistence to dismantle the armed forces.
No Error.
19 . The election of a separatist-dominated
Parliament has alarmed those who will believe
Quebec must not secede from Canada. No Error.
20. The engineers have designed an offshore drilling
platform strong enough to withstand not only
Atlantic storms but also the occasional iceberg.
No Error.
21. In Britain, a nationwide business
in buying and selling special license plates
have developed, and prices rise each year.
No Error.
22. If we plan carefully and waste no time
on irrelevant topics, you should be able to
finish the essay in twenty minutes. No Error.
23. Desperately trying to lead the cat away from the
nest, the bird had flew within inches of its claw.
No Error.
24. The citizens of Berlin bid a fondly good-bye to
the American troops who had occupied much of
the city since the war ended. No Error.
25. When the new ambassador first arrived
in the capital, though late in May, they found
that the larger lakes were still frozen. No Error.
26. Encouraged by the success of its weekly
Spanish-language programs, MTV will launch
a twenty-four hour Spanish language cable
network. No Error.
Part II: Practice-Review-Analyze-Practice
A BC
D
E
A
B
CD
E
A
BC
D
E
A
BC
DE
A
BC
D
E
A
C
B
D
E
A
B C
D E
AB
CD
E
AB
C
D E
A
BC D
E
AB
C
D
E
Questions 27-31 are based on the following passage.
(1) Separation is to pass from one stage of life as we
prepare for another stage of life. (2) It is a process that
occurs in life all throughout one's development. (3) The
process of separation is a large part of the rebellious stage
of adolescence. (4) The adolescent struggles with estab-
lishing his own identity, and to separate from his parents
by rejecting parental rules and expectations. (5) The re-
jection and struggles are parts of this separation process.
(6) Unusual clothing, hair-styles and color are frequently
the first signs to appear indicating a separation process is
taking place. (7) They are an outward display declaring
their independence and separation.
(8) A mature adult experiences separation in many
areas of life. (9) For example, separation from a job,
career, marriage, community, and also by death from a
parent or loved one are inescapable events. (10) A separa-
tion from a job may be devastating if it is unplanned or a
decision made by another. (11) Even a planned job or
career change brings on a certain amount of anxiety, es-
pecially if the change requires a relocation. (12) Many
adults become depressed and have difficulty dealing with
separation. (13) A career change is not well planned if it
occurs at the same time as other separations like divorce
or the death of a parent.
(14) The death of parent, spouse or loved one brings us
to a more terrifying separation anxiety. (15) The healing
process is longer and anxiety is high. (16) It awakens our
rational and irrational emotions. (17) I can clearly remem-
ber being angry when my father died. (18) I was angry at
him for leaving, yet I know he did not choose his time of
death. (19) It was a totally irrational feeling, yet it was
very real. (20) Fortunately, as we develop our courage
to handle separation also grows. (21) Separation never
becomes mundane; it always remains a challenge.
27. Which of the following is the best revision of the
underlined portions of sentences 1 and 2 below?
Separation is to pass from one stage of life as
we prepare for another stage of life. It is a
process that occurs in life all throughout
one's development.
A. is to pass from one stage of life as we
prepare for another stage, and it is a process
that occurs in life throughout one's
development.
B. is passing from one stage of life in a process
that occurs all throughout one's
development.
C. is to pass from one stage in the process of
life's development as we prepare for another
stage.
D. occurs when we pass from one stage in
preparation for another stage of life's
development.
E. is a life-long process of passing from one
stage of development to another.
28. Which of the following is the best version of the
underlined portion of sentence 4?
The adolescent struggles with establishing
his own identity, and to separate from his
parents by rejecting parental rules and
expectations.
A. Leave it as it is.
B. with establishing their own identity and
separating themselves from parents by
rejecting parental
C. with establishing identity, and separating
themselves from parents by rejecting parental
D. to establish his own identity, and to separate
from his parents by rejecting their
E. to establish their own identity, and to
separate from their parents by rejecting
parental
Practice Test 1
Practice Test 1
GO ON TO THE NEXT PAGE
Directions: The following passages are early drafts of student essays. Some parts of them need to be revised.
Read the selections carefully and answer the questions that follow. There will be questions about sentence structure,
diction, and usage in individual sentences or parts of sentences. Other questions will deal with the whole essay or para-
graphs, and ask you to decide about organization, development, and appropriate language. Choose the answer that fol-
lows the requirements of standard written English, and most effectively expresses the intended meanings.
29. Unlike the first paragraph, the second paragraph
deals with separations
A. that are literal, rather than figurative.
B. that can occur only to adults.
C. that may involve unhappiness.
D. that mark a passage from one stage of life to
another.
E. that are exclusively male.
30. Which of the following sentences could be deleted
with the least disturbance to the sense of the
passage?
A. sentence 8
B. sentence 9
C. sentence 10
D. sentence 12
E. sentence 13
31. Which of the following changes would make
sentence 20 clearer?
A. Combine sentence 20 with sentence 19.
B. Combine sentence 20 with sentence 21.
C. Delete the comma after "Fortunately."
D. Add a comma after "develop."
E. Change "to handle" to "in handling."
Questions 32-35 are based on the following passage.
(1) Almost every week I am guilty of procrastination.
(2) The dictionary definition of "procrastination" is "ha-
bitually putting off doing something that should be
done." (3) For me, the act of procrastinating is a series of
excuses for avoiding assigned tasks. (4) I can't say ex-
actly why I go through the agony of waiting till the very
last moment of all to begin my chore. (5) But though I al-
ways ask "Why do you wait so long?" I keep putting
things off to the last minute.
(6) The reasons for procrastinating vary and I am not
always sure which category of reasons the enterprise falls
into. (7) The easiest reason of all to recognize is that of
simply trying to avoid an unpleasant chore. (8) It is not
surprising that I would want to put off doing something
that would cause emotional distress. (9) Another reason
for procrastinating is facing a task that seems insurmount-
able. (10) "It's too much," I tell myself. (11) Sometimes it
is the unfamiliarity that causes this behavior. (12) After all
the fear of the unknown requires taking a risk. (13) Taking
a risk requires the possibility of failure-could that be the
real reason for procrastinating?
(14) Whatever the reasons, the result is the same: a
sleepless night filled with guilt and anxiety. (15) Guilt
and its by-product anxiety become the major components
of the effects of procrastination. (16) I know that I can
avoid all the psychological imbalances associated with
procrastination. (17) Logically, I can take out my plan-
ning calendar and schedule my time to accommodate any
task, any chores, or any assignment. (18) And once again
procrastination overpowers logic and the last minute rush
begins.
32. Which of the following is the best version of
sentence 6 (reproduced below)?
The reasons for procrastinating vary and I
am not always sure which category of
reasons the enterprise falls into.
A. Leave it as it is.
B. The reasons for procrastination vary, and into
which category of reasons the enterprise falls
is not always sure.
C. The reasons for procrastinating are varied
and which category fits the enterprise is
uncertain.
D. The reasons vary, and I am not always sure
why I procrastinate.
E. The categories of reasons for procrastination
vary, and which fits an enterprise is not
always sure.
33. Sentence 7 (reproduced below) could be made
more concise by deleting all of the following
words EXCEPT
The easiest reason of all to recognize is that of
simply trying to avoid an unpleasant chore.
A. reason
B. of all
C. that of
D. simply
E. to avoid
34. Which of the following best describes the writer's
intention in the second paragraph?
A. to suggest reasons to explain behavior
B. to summarize evidence of irrational behavior
C. to give specific details
D. to point a moral conclusion
E. to evaluate evidence of irrational behavior
Part II: Practice-Review-Analyze-Practice
35. Which of the following sentences could be
eliminated from the third paragraph without
seriously affecting its meaning or coherence?
A. sentence 14
B. sentence 15
C. sentence 16
D. sentence 17
E. sentence 18
Practice Test 1
Practice Test 1
IF YOU FINISH BEFORE TIME IS CALLED, CHECK YOUR WORK ON THIS
SECTION ONLY . DO NOT WORK ON ANY OTHER SECTION IN THE TEST. STOP
prevent second heart attacks, it can also
A. fanciful . . . eliminate
B. logical . . . ward off
C. sensible . . . encourage
D. reasonable . . . foment
E. idle . . . defend against
because, though cigar smokers do not inhale, they
mouth cancers than nonsmokers.
A. answer . . . responsible for
B. preference . . . free from
C. alternative . . . subject to
D. rejoinder . . . involved in
E. accent . . . victimized by
3. Justices Marshall and Brennan opposed the
death penalty on the grounds that it failed to
evidence made it clear that far more murders per
capita were committed in states or countries with
capital punishment than in those without it.
A. explain
B. augment
C. foster
D. deter
E. exculpate
Mr. Fitzgerald was glad to return to the
A. hubbub . . . turbid
B. grime . . . murky
C. tranquility . . . effulgent
D. composure . . . brisk
E. hustle-bustle . . . exhilarating
Part II: Practice-Review-Analyze-Practice
Section 5: Critical Reading
Time: 25 Minutes
27 Questions
In this section, choose the best answer for each question and blacken the corresponding space on the answer sheet.
Directions: Each blank in the following sentences indicates that something has been omitted. Consider the lettered
words beneath the sentence and choose the word or set of words that best fits the whole sentence.
EXAMPLE:
continent.
A. impoverished
B. successful
C. populous
D. developed
E. militant
The correct answer is C.
5. A strike by Ford workers in Mexico poses a(n)
choose between alienating its union ally or
undermining its fight against inflation.
A. enigma
B. dilemma
C. problem
D. option
E. riddle
6. By combining an American cartoon character with
Japanese traditions, the popular comic by Stan
Sakai presents as a hero a samurai rabbit, a unique
A. fusion
B. division
C. rejection
D. exclusion
E. query
the legality of casino gambling was passed by
A. statute . . . meager
B. referendum . . . overwhelming
C. prohibition . . . huge
D. bill . . . narrow
E. ban . . . sizable
is that no males live beyond the age of 18.
A. theory . . . fatuity
B. plot . . . understanding
C. idea . . . recalcitrance
D. premise . . . subtlety
E. solution . . . cleverness
automobiles in the Middle Ages is part of the
comedy of this high-spirited film.
A. untimely
B. anachronistic
C. unconvincing
D. archaic
E. supposed
Practice Test 1
Practice Test 1
GO ON TO THE NEXT PAGE
Questions 10-11 are based on the following passage.
Jonas Salk, who developed the first successful
polio vaccine, became involved in polio research
only as a means of obtaining funding for his new
laboratory in Pittsburgh. This laboratory was one of
four receiving grants for the polio virus typing pro-
ject, which began in 1948. Salk originally believed
that the project was a "dull but dependable invest-
ment that would provide money for his lab."
Perhaps Salk's newness to the study of polio bene-
fited him because he started fresh, without precon-
ceived ideas. He was the only researcher to use the
newly developed tissue culture method of working
with the virus. Other researchers, including Albert
Sabin, who later developed the oral polio vaccine,
did their work with monkeys infected with the
virus, a more difficult process.
10 . The main purpose of the paragraph is to
A. criticize Salk for his interest in funding
rather than finding a polio vaccine.
B. compare the research methods of Jonas Salk
and Albert Sabin.
C. indicate how desperate the medical
community was to find a polio vaccine.
D. criticize Albert Sabin for clinging to
outmoded forms of virus research.
E. suggest that Salk's newness to polio research
may have been an advantage.
11. Given the information in the passage, which of the
following can best be described as ironic?
A. "Albert Sabin, who later developed the oral
polio vaccine. . . ." (lines 13-14)
B. ". . . originally believed that the project was a
'dull but dependable investment'" (lines 6-8)
C. "He was the only researcher to use the newly
developed tissue culture . . . ." (lines 11-12)
D. ". . . he started fresh, without preconceived
ideas." (lines 10-11)
E. "This laboratory was one of four receiving
grants for the polio typing project, which
began in 1948." (lines 4-6)
Questions 12-15 are based on the following pair of
passages.
Passage 1
The boob tube hasn't done much for national
elections. Political ads are sound bites, and televised
debates have become less and less informative.
Generally, candidates are elliptical in expressing
their convictions. In the 1960 Kennedy-Nixon de-
bates both candidates were relatively forthright.
Both candidates agreed they'd be willing to raise
taxes in the interest of national defense, something
politicians wouldn't do today for fear an opponent
would focus on the statement in a negative campaign
commercial. The amount of time each candidate
spends making a point and answering questions has
decreased from election to election. Is this because
the audience's attention span is getting shorter or is
it because neither candidate wants to be too specific
about issues on the chance that someone's feathers
might get ruffled?
Passage 2
Television has become an integral part of the
political process in America. In 1992, the audience
for the first presidential debate was larger than the
audience for the Super Bowl. Many people regard
television debates as the most effective way we
have of choosing a leader, and the popularity of the
town-meeting style of television debates may sig-
nal Americans' desire to enter the political process
and become more active in making their choices.
Because of television, candidates are less depen-
dent on party infrastructure to disseminate their
messages. They can appeal to people directly. A
good example is the 1992 independent candidacy
of Ross Perot. Although losing the election, Perot
garnered 19 percent of the popular vote, and for
much of this, he had television to thank.
Part II: Practice-Review-Analyze-Practice
Directions: Questions follow the passage below. Using only the stated or implied information in the passage and in its
introduction, if any, answer the questions.
12 . According to the author of Passage 1, television
debates
A. have improved since the Kennedy-Nixon
debates in 1960.
B. are of little interest to most Americans.
C. provide valuable information to the
electorate.
D. encourage the candidates to be forthright in
their responses.
E. give candidates less time to speak than they
13 . In Passage 1, the word "elliptical" (line 4) most
nearly means
A. redundant.
B. sincerely felt.
C. deliberately obscure.
D. terse and to the point.
E. quietly persuasive.
14 . According to the author of Passage 2, all of the
following are positive results of televised debates
EXCEPT
A. greater voter turnout at the polls.
B. greater interest in taking an active role in
elections.
C. greater availability of information for voters.
D. less importance of political party
infrastructure.
E. greater visibility for independent candidates.
15 . Which of the following best characterizes the
difference between Passage 1 and Passage 2?
A. Passage 1 is light-hearted and Passage 2 is
philosophical.
B. The two passages are alike in tone but
different in point of view.
C. Passage 1 is colloquial and sarcastic and
Passage 2 is straightforward.
D. While Passage 2 is literary and pompous,
Passage 1 is objective and journalistic.
E. Passage 1 focuses on facts, whereas Passage
2 focuses on ideas.
Questions 16-27 are based on the following passage.
Early in the day Dorothea had returned from the
infant school which she had set going in the vil-
lage, and was taking her usual place in the pretty
sitting-room which divided the bedrooms of the
sisters, bent on finishing a plan for some buildings
(a kind of work which she delighted in), when
Celia, who had been watching her with a hesitating
desire to propose something, said-"Dorothea
dear, if you don't mind-if you are not very busy-
suppose we looked at mamma's jewels today, and
divided them? It is exactly six months today since
uncle gave them to you, and you have not looked at
them yet."
Celia's face had the shadow of a pouting
expression in it, the full presence of the pout being
kept back by an habitual awe of Dorothea. To her
relief, Dorothea's eyes were full of laughter as she
looked up.
"What a wonderful little almanac you are,
Celia! Is it six calendar or six lunar months?"
"It is the last day of September now, and it was
the first of April when uncle gave them to you. You
know, he said that he had forgotten them till then. I
believe you have never thought of them since you
locked them up in the cabinet here."
"Well, dear, we should never wear them, you
know." Dorothea spoke in a full cordial tone, half
caressing, half explanatory. She had her pencil in
her hand, and was making tiny side-plans on a
margin.
Celia coloured, and looked very grave. "I think,
dear, we are wanting in respect to mamma's mem-
ory, to put them by and take no notice of them.
And," she added, after hesitating a little, "necklaces
are quite usual now; and Madame Poinçon, who
was stricter in some things even than you are, used
to wear ornaments. And Christians generally-
surely there are women in heaven now who wore
jewels." Celia was conscious of some mental
strength when she really applied herself to argu-
ment.
"You would like to wear them?" exclaimed
Dorothea, an air of astonished discovery animating
her whole person. "Of course, then, let us have them
out. Why did you not tell me before? But the keys,
the keys!" She pressed her hands against the sides
of her head and seemed to despair of her memory.
"They are here," said Celia, with whom this expla-
nation had been long meditated and prearranged.
Practice Test 1
Practice Test 1
GO ON TO THE NEXT PAGE
The casket was soon open before them, and the
various jewels spread out on the table. It was no
great collection, but a few of the ornaments were re-
ally of remarkable beauty, the finest that was obvi-
ous at first being a necklace of purple amethysts set
in exquisite gold work, and a pearl cross with five
brilliants in it. Dorothea immediately took up the
necklace and fastened it round her sister's neck,
where it fitted almost as closely as a bracelet; but the
circle suited the style of Celia's head and neck, and
she could see that it did, in the pier-glass opposite.
"There, Celia! You can wear that with your
Indian muslin. But this cross you must wear with
your dark dresses."
Celia was trying not to smile with pleasure.
"O Dodo, you must keep the cross yourself."
"No, no, dear, no," said Dorothea, putting up her
hand with careless deprecation.
"Yes, indeed you must; it would suit you-in
your black dress, now," said Celia, insistingly.
"You might wear that."
"Not for the world, not for the world. A cross is
the last thing I would wear as a trinket." Dorothea
shuddered slightly.
"Then you will think it wicked in me to wear it,"
said Celia, uneasily.
"No, dear, no," said Dorothea, stroking her sis-
ter's cheek. "Souls have complexions too: what
will suit one will not suit another."
"But you might like to keep it for mamma's
sake."
"No, I have other things of mamma's-her
sandal-wood box which I am so fond of-plenty of
things. In fact, they are all yours, dear. We need dis-
cuss them no longer.
There-take away your property."
Celia felt a little hurt. There was a strong assump-
tion of superiority in this Puritanic toleration, hardly
less trying to the blond flesh of an unenthusiastic
sister than a Puritanic persecution.
16 . From the details of the passage, it can be learned
or inferred that
I. Dorothea and Celia are sisters.
II. Dorothea and Celia may be orphans.
III. Dorothea and Celia are temperamentally
very alike.
A. III only
B. I and II only
C. I and III only
D. II and III only
E. I, II, and, III
17. The first paragraph of the passage refers to the
"infant school" and "plan for some buildings" in
order to suggest that Dorothea is
A. prying and interfering.
B. rich and idle.
C. self-centered and ambitious.
D. active and unselfish.
E. philanthropic and ineffectual.
18 . In line 20, Dorothea asks Celia whether it is "six
calendar or six lunar months" because she
A. wants to know exactly how many days have
passed.
B. is good-humoredly teasing Celia.
C. had hoped to keep the jewels from Celia.
D. wants to demonstrate the scientific precision
of her mind.
E. has forgotten what the current month is.
19 . In line 32, the phrase "wanting in respect" can be
best understood to mean
A. obliged to be more deferential.
B. desirous to esteem.
C. lewd in regard.
D. deficient in regard.
E. eager for consideration.
20. The "argument" to which Celia has "really
applied herself" (lines 40-41) is intended to
convince Dorothea to
A. show greater respect for their dead mother.
B. give all the jewels to her.
C. give the most valuable of the jewels to her.
D. agree to sharing and wearing the jewels.
E. examine the jewels and lock them up again.
21. Although in lines 26-27 Dorothea has said, "we
should never wear them, you know," she changes
her opinion because she
A. is moved by Celia's appeal to the memory of
their mother.
B. is convinced by Celia's reference to Madame
C. realizes that Celia wants to wear the jewels.
D. sees how becoming the jewels are to Celia.
E. can appear superior to Celia by refusing to
wear them herself.
Part II: Practice-Review-Analyze-Practice
22. In line 67, the word "deprecation" means
A. protest.
B. lessening.
C. indifference.
D. removal.
E. agreement.
23. The word "trying" in line 88 means
A. irksome.
B. attempting.
C. effortful.
D. experimental.
E. determining.
24. In line 87, "Puritanic toleration" is a reference to
A. Celia's awe of Dorothea.
B. Celia's acceptance of Dorothea's foibles.
C. Celia's love of jewels and finery.
D. Dorothea's hypocritical indifference to
finery.
E. Dorothea's self-denial and generosity.
25. In the last sentence of the passage, the word
"unenthusiastic" refers to
A. Dorothea's refusal to wear jewels.
B. Dorothea's giving her permission for Celia
to wear jewels.
C. Celia's attitude toward self-denial.
D. Celia's attitude toward wearing jewels.
E. the author's attitude toward Dorothea.
26. The inconsistency in Dorothea's reasoning that the
passage reveals is her
A. forgetting about when the jewels were given
to her.
B. losing the keys to the cabinet holding the
jewels.
C. insistence that Christians cannot wear jewels.
D. wanting Celia to wear jewels but refusing to
wear them herself.
E. deceitful claim that she honors the memory
of her mother.
27. The purpose of the passage as a whole is to
A. reveal the likeness of Celia and Dorothea.
B. expose the submerged ill feelings between
Celia and Dorothea.
C. reveal the differences in the natures of Celia
and Dorothea.
D. demonstrate the dangers of materialism.
E. satirize the hypocrisy of the two young
women.
Practice Test 1
Practice Test 1
IF YOU FINISH BEFORE TIME IS CALLED, CHECK YOUR WORK ON THIS
SECTION ONLY . DO NOT WORK ON ANY OTHER SECTION IN THE TEST. STOP
Part II: Practice-Review-Analyze-Practice
Section 6: Mathematics
Time: 25 Minutes
20 Questions
Directions: This section is composed of two types of questions. Use the 25 minutes allotted to answer both question
types. For questions 1-10, select the one correct answer of the five choices given and mark the corresponding circle on
your answer sheet. Your scratch work should be done on any available space in the section.
Notes
1. All numbers used are real numbers.
2. Calculators may be used.
3. Some problems may be accompanied by figures or diagrams. These figures are drawn as accurately as possible
EXCEPT when it is stated in a specific problem that a figure is not drawn to scale. The figures and diagrams are
meant to provide information useful in solving the problem or problems. Unless otherwise stated, all figures and
diagrams lie in a plane.
Data That Can Be Used for Reference
rectangle
A = lw
Area
triangle
circle
rectangular solid
V = lwh
Volume
right circular cylinder
Pythagorean Relationship
Special T riangles
A circle is composed of 360°
A straight angle measures 180°
The sum of the angles of a triangle is 180°
w
l
h
b
r
M
r
h
l
h
w
a2 + b2 = c 2
C B
A
c
a
b
x
x
1. In the preceding sequence, a certain pattern
determines each of the subsequent numbers.
What is the next number in the sequence?
2. What is 4
1 of 0.03 percent?
3. What is the area of /H17005ABC in the figure above?
A. 3
B. 6
The product of two numbers is equal to twice
the difference of the two numbers.
4. Which equation best represents the preceding
situation?
A. x + y = 2(x - y)
C. (x)(y) = 2(x ÷ y)
D. (x)(y) = 2(x - y)
E. (x)(y) = 2(x + y)
C (2,3)
O x
y
A (-2,-3) B (2,-3)
Practice Test 1
Practice Test 1
GO ON TO THE NEXT PAGE
5. If 4n = 64, what is the value of 3n + 2?
6. For what values of z is fz z
zz
+-^h
undefined?
B. 5
C. 0
D. -5
E. -5, 5
7. If D is between A and B on AB, then which of the
following must be true?
A. AD = DB
B. DB = AB - AD
C. AD = AB + DB
D. DB = AD + AB
E. AB = AD - BD
8. If x x3 18-= , then x =
A. -9 or 9
B. -6 or -3
C. 6 or -3
D. -6 or 3
E. 6 or 3
Part II: Practice-Review-Analyze-Practice
9. For all integers z,
zz 1
=- , if z is an even integer and
zz 1
=+ , if z is an odd integer.
What is the value 76- ?
A. -2
B. 2
C. 4
10 . What is the length of the diameter XZ of the circle
above if XY = 15 and YZ = 8?
E. Cannot be determined from the given
information.
Z
X
Y
Practice Test 1
Practice Test 1
GO ON TO THE NEXT PAGE
Part II: Practice-Review-Analyze-Practice
Directions for Student-Produced Response Questions (Grid-ins): Questions 11-20 require you to solve the
problem and enter your answer by carefully marking the circles on the special grid. Examples of the appropriate way to
mark the grid follow.
Answer: 3.7 Answer: 2
Answer: 1 2
Do not grid in mixed numbers in the form of mixed numbers. Always change mixed numbers to improper fractions or
decimals.
.. .
.. .
.. .
Fraction bar
.. .
Decimal point
Answer: 123
Space permitting, answers may start in any column. Each grid-in answer below is correct.
Note: Circles must be filled in correctly to receive credit. Mark only one circle in each column. No credit will be given
if more than one circle in a column is marked. Example:
Answer: 258 (no credit)
.. .
.. .
.. .
Practice Test 1
Practice Test 1
GO ON TO THE NEXT PAGE
Answer: 9
Accuracy of decimals: Always enter the most accurate decimal value that the grid will accommodate. For example: An
answer such as .8888. . . can be gridded as .888 or .889. Gridding this value as .8, .88, or .89 is considered inaccurate
and therefore not acceptable. The acceptable grid-ins of 9
are:
Be sure to write your answers in the boxes at the top of the circles before doing your gridding. Although writing out the
answers above the columns is not required, it is very important to ensure accuracy. Even though some problems may
have more than one correct answer, grid only one answer. Grid-in questions contain no negative answers.
.. .
.. .
.. .
Part II: Practice-Review-Analyze-Practice
11. What is the value of 5x2 - 3x + 2 when x = -4?
12 . A long-distance telephone call costs $2.45 for the
first 3 minutes and $.32 per minute for each
additional minute. What is the cost in dollars and
cents for a 25-minute call? (Disregard the $ sign
when gridding your answer.)
13 . A jacket sold for $56, which was 80% of the
original price. What was the original price in
dollars and cents? (Disregard the $ sign when
gridding your answer.)
14 . What is the length of the side of a cube whose
volume is 64 cubic units?
15 . Scholastic Supplies, Inc. sends the bill above to
Zither Junior High School. Although the bill
includes the cost of science lab workbooks,
Scholastic Supplies forgot to list them on the bill.
How much did the science lab workbooks cost
Zither High School? (Disregard the $ sign when
gridding your answer.)
16 . If the numerator of a fraction is tripled, and the
denominator of a fraction is doubled, the resulting
fraction will reflect an increase of what percent?
(Disregard the % sign when gridding your
answer.)
17. In the figure above l1||l2, what is the value of x?
BILL FOR PURCHASE
Science Textbooks
Lab Equipment
Formaldehyde
Teacher's Manuals
Practice Test 1
Practice Test 1
GO ON TO THE NEXT PAGE
18 . Based on the chart above, how much more money
was spent on clothing than on insurance?
19 . In the figure above, what is the ratio of the degree
measure of ∠ MQP to the degree measure of
20. A bus leaves from Burbank at 9:00 a.m. traveling
east at 50 miles per hour. At 1:00 p.m., a plane
leaves Burbank traveling east at 300 miles per
hour. How many minutes will it take the plane to
overtake the bus?
M X P
Q
N
insurance
food
rent
clothing
travel
$8000 Total Per Year
Part II: Practice-Review-Analyze-Practice
IF YOU FINISH BEFORE TIME IS CALLED, CHECK YOUR WORK ON THIS
SECTION ONLY . DO NOT WORK ON ANY OTHER SECTION IN THE TEST. STOP
Questions 1-15 are based on the following passages.
The two passages that follow are taken from recent
historical studies of Christopher Columbus.
Passage 1
In his history published in 1552, Francisco
Lopez de Gomara wrote: "The greatest event since
the creation of the world (excluding the incarnation
and death of Him who created it) is the discovery of
the Indies." On the strength of this realization,
Columbus emerged from the shadows, reincarnated
not so much as a man and historical figure as he was
as a myth and symbol. He came to epitomize the ex-
plorer and discoverer, the man of vision and audac-
ity, the hero who overcame opposition and adversity
to change history. By the end of the sixteenth cen-
tury, English explorers and writers acknowledged
the primacy and inspiration of Columbus. He was
celebrated in poetry and plays, especially by the
Italians. Even Spain was coming around. In a popu-
lar play, Lope de Vega in 1614 portrayed Columbus
as a dreamer up against the stolid forces of en-
trenched tradition, a man of singular purpose who
triumphed, the embodiment of that spirit driving hu-
mans to explore and discover.
Historians cannot control the popularizers of
history, mythmakers, or propagandists, and in post-
Revolutionary America the few historians who
studied Columbus were probably not disposed to
try. Even if they had been, there was little informa-
tion available on which to assess the real Columbus
and distinguish the man from the myth. With the
ments by Martin Fernandez de Navarrete in 1825,
this was less of an excuse, and yet the material only
provided more ammunition to those who would
embellish the symbolic Columbus through the
nineteenth century.
Washington Irving mined the new documents to
create a hero in the romantic mold favored in the
century's literature. Irving's Columbus was "a man
of great and inventive genius" and his "ambition
was lofty and noble, inspiring him with high
thoughts, and an anxiety to distinguish himself by
great achievements." Perhaps. But an effusive
Irving got carried away. He said that Columbus's
"conduct was characterized by the grandeur of his
views and the magnanimity of his spirit . . . . Instead
of ravaging the newly found countries . . . he sought
to colonize and cultivate them, to civilize the na-
tives." Irving acknowledged that Columbus may
have had some faults, such as his part in enslaving
and killing people, but offered the palliating expla-
nation that these were "errors of the times."
William H. Prescott, a leading American histo-
rian of the conquest period, said of Columbus that
"the finger of the historian will find it difficult to
point to a single blemish in his moral character."
Writers and orators of the nineteenth century as-
cribed to Columbus all the human virtues that were
most prized in that time of geographic and indus-
trial expansion, heady optimism, and an unques-
tioning belief in progress as the dynamic of history.
Most people living in America four centuries
after the voyages of discovery had created the
Columbus they wanted to believe in and were quite
satisfied with their creation. But scholars were
already finding grounds for a major reassessment
of Columbus's reputation in history.
Passage 2
Why should one suppose that a culture like
Europe's, steeped as it was in the ardor of wealth,
the habit of violence, and the pride of intolerance,
dispirited and adrift after a century and more of
disease and famine and death beyond experience,
would be able to come upon new societies in a fer-
tile world, innocent and defenseless, and not dis-
place and subdue, if necessary destroy, them? Why
should one suppose such a culture would pause
there to observe, to learn, to borrow the wisdom
and the ways of a foreign, heathen people, half
naked and befeathered, ignorant of cities and kings
Practice Test 1
Practice Test 1
GO ON TO THE NEXT PAGE
Section 7: Critical Reading
Time: 20 Minutes
15 Questions
In this section, choose the best answer for each question and blacken the corresponding space on the answer sheet.
Directions: Questions follow the two passages below. Using only the stated or implied information in each passage
and in its introduction, if any, answer the questions.
and metal and laws, and unschooled in all that the
Ancients held virtuous? Was not Europe in its
groping era of discovery in the fifteenth century in
fact in search of salvation, as its morbid sonnets
said, or of that regeneration which new lands and
new peoples and of course new riches would be
presumed to provide?
And there was salvation there, in the New
World, though it was not of a kind the Europeans
then understood. They thought first that exploita-
tion was salvation, and they went at that with a
vengeance, and found new foods and medicines
and treasures, but that proved not to be; that colo-
nization and settlement was salvation, and they
peopled both continents with conquerors, and it
was not that either. The salvation there, had the
Europeans known where and how to look for it,
was obviously in the integrative tribal ways, the
nurturant communitarian values, the rich interplay
with nature that made up the Indian cultures-as it
made up, for that matter, the cultures of ancient
peoples everywhere, not excluding Europe. It was
there especially in the Indian consciousness, in
what Calvin Martin has termed "the biological out-
look on life," in which patterns and concepts and
the large teleological constructs of culture are not
human-centered but come from the sense of being
at one with nature, biocentric, ecocentric.
However one may cast it, an opportunity there
certainly was once, a chance for the people of
Europe to find a new anchorage in a new country,
in what they dimly realized was the land of
Paradise, and thus find finally the way to redeem
the world. But all they ever found was half a world
of nature's treasures and nature's peoples that
could be taken, and they took them, never knowing,
never learning the true regenerative power there,
and that opportunity was lost. Theirs was indeed a
conquest of Paradise, but as is inevitable with any
war against the world of nature, those who win will
have lost-once again lost, and this time perhaps
forever.
1. In lines 15-20 of the first paragraph, the reference
to the play by Lope de Vega serves to
I. give an example of Columbus's reputation
in Spain.
II. demonstrate how widespread Columbus's
reputation had become.
III. exemplify how Columbus was already a
myth and symbol of the discoverer.
A. I only
B. II only
C. I and III only
D. II and III only
E. I, II, and III
2. In Passage 1 (line 24), the word "disposed" means
A. arranged.
B. employed.
C. settled.
D. inclined.
E. given away.
3. In Passage 1 (line 35), the phrase "romantic mold"
most nearly means
A. pattern concerned with love.
B. idealized manner.
C. visionary model.
D. fictitious shape.
E. escapist style.
4. Of the following words used in the third paragraph
of Passage 1, which most clearly reveals a
judgment of the modern author as opposed to that
of Washington Irving?
A. "mined" (line 34)
B. "ambition" (line 37)
C. "Perhaps" (line 40)
D. "magnanimity" (line 43)
E. "palliating" (line 48)
Part II: Practice-Review-Analyze-Practice
5. The major purpose of Passage 1 is to
A. praise the daring and accomplishments of
Columbus.
B. survey the reputation of Columbus from the
sixteenth through the nineteenth century.
C. contrast the real Columbus of history with
the mythic Columbus of the nineteenth
century.
D. describe the benefits and the damage of
Columbus's voyages.
E. reveal the unforeseen and harmful
consequences of Columbus's voyages.
6. With which of the following generalizations would
the author of Passage 1 be most likely to agree?
I. The values of a historical period are usually
reflected by the heroes people of that time
choose to idolize.
II. What people believe about historical figures
is usually what they want to believe.
III. Written history is usually a record of the
truth as it is known at the time of writing.
A. I only
B. I and II only
C. I and III only
D. II and III only
E. I, II, and III
7. The questions of the first paragraph of Passage 2
(lines 65-83) serve chiefly to
A. raise doubts about issues that cannot be
explained.
B. defend and justify the actions of Europeans
in the age of discovery.
C. suggest areas that future historians might
profitably explore.
D. show how much easier it is to understand
issues of the distant past with the objectivity
given by time.
E. reveal the author's ideas about the nature of
Europeans at the time of Columbus's
voyages.
8. In Passage 2 (lines 77-78), the phrase "unschooled
in all that the Ancients held virtuous" is used to
I. reflect the European view of the American
natives.
II. reveal a significant foundation of European
culture in the period.
III. give a reason for the European contempt for
the native Americans.
A. III only
B. I and II only
C. I and III only
D. II and III only
E. I, II, and III
9. Which of the following does Passage 2 present as
discovered and understood by the Europeans in
America?
A. Human-centered cultures
B. New foods and medicines
C. Communitarian values
D. An Indian consciousness
E. An ecocentric culture
10 . According to Passage 2, a "biological outlook on
life" would be best defined as one in which
A. the interdependence of all life forms is
understood.
B. humans are the measure of all things.
C. the needs of rich and poor are equally
considered.
D. the economic well-being of all races is
emphasized.
E. the primary motivation is survival of the
species.
11. The major purpose of Passage 2 is to
A. describe the benefits and damage of
Columbus's discovery.
B. present Columbus's discovery as a tragically
missed opportunity to regenerate Europe.
C. attack the greed and cruelty that inspired the
European colonization of America.
D. defend the European colonization of America
as historically determined and unavoidable.
E. evaluate as objectively as possible the
meaning of the European incursion into the
Americas.
Practice Test 1
Practice Test 1
GO ON TO THE NEXT PAGE
12 . Of the five paragraphs in Passage 1, which one
best prepares the reader for the contents of
Passage 2?
A. The first (lines 1-20)
B. The second (lines 21-33)
C. The third (lines 34-49)
D. The fourth (lines 50-58)
E. The fifth (lines 59-64)
13 . Compared to Passage 1, Passage 2 may be
described by all the following EXCEPT
A. more personal.
B. more philosophical.
C. more judgmental.
D. more historical.
E. more emotional.
14 . Compared to that of Passage 1, the prose of
Passage 2 makes greater use of all the following
EXCEPT
A. words in series.
B. rhetorical questions.
C. understatements.
D. repetitions.
E. parallel phrases.
15 . Which of the following aptly describes a
relationship between Passage 1 and Passage 2?
I. Passage 1 predicts a reevaluation of
Columbus's accomplishments, and Passage 2
makes that reevaluation.
II. Passage 1 calls attention to the way the
image of Columbus in each period reflects
the values of that period, and Passage 2
presents an image that reflects late twentieth-
century ideas.
III. Passage 1 focuses on the reputation of
Columbus, and Passage 2 emphasizes his
unique character.
A. III only
B. I and II only
C. I and III only
D. II and III only
E. I, II, and III
Part II: Practice-Review-Analyze-Practice
IF YOU FINISH BEFORE TIME IS CALLED, CHECK YOUR WORK ON THIS
SECTION ONLY . DO NOT WORK ON ANY OTHER SECTION IN THE TEST. STOP
Section 8: Mathematics
Time: 20 Minutes
15 Questions
Directions: Solve each problem in this section by using the information given and your own mathematical calcula-
tions, insights, and problem-solving skills. Then select the one correct answer of the five choices given and mark the
corresponding circle on your answer sheet. Use the available space on the page for your scratch work.
Notes
1. All numbers used are real numbers.
2. Calculators may be used.
3. Some problems may be accompanied by figures or diagrams. These figures are drawn as accurately as possible
EXCEPT when it is stated in a specific problem that a figure is not drawn to scale. The figures and diagrams are
meant to provide information useful in solving the problem or problems. Unless otherwise stated, all figures and
diagrams lie in a plane.
Data That Can Be Used for Reference
rectangle
A = lw
Area
triangle
circle
rectangular solid
V = lwh
Volume
right circular cylinder
Pythagorean Relationship
Special T riangles
A circle is composed of 360°
A straight angle measures 180°
The sum of the angles of a triangle is 180°
w
l
h
b
r
M
r
h
l
h
w
a2 + b2 = c 2
C B
A
c
a
b
x
x
Practice Test 1
Practice Test 1
GO ON TO THE NEXT PAGE
1. If 2x + 13 represents an odd number, what must
the next consecutive odd number be?
A. 2x + 15
B. 2x + 14
C. 3x + 13
D. 3x + 15
E. 4x + 1
2. A suit that originally sold for $120 was on sale for
$90. What was the rate of discount?
9= , then x =
A. 5
B. 9
Note: Figure not drawn to scale.
4. If, in the figure above ∠ CFD = ∠ AFB, then what
is the degree measure of ∠ AFE?
A F
E
D
C
B
Part II: Practice-Review-Analyze-Practice
5. What is the value of x if the average of 93, 82, 79,
and x is 87?
SCHOOLWIDE EYE COLOR SURVEY
6. Annette does a schoolwide survey and publishes
her results in the preceding circle graph. If 62
people at Annette's school have hazel eyes, how
many have brown eyes?
7. Gasoline varies in cost from $0.96 to $1.12 per
gallon. If a car's mileage varies from 16 to 24
miles per gallon, what is the difference between
the most and the least that the gasoline for a
480-mile trip will cost?
8. If the length and width of a rectangle are increased
by x units, its perimeter is increased by how many
units?
A. 4x
B. 2x
C. x2
D. x
E. x + 4
brown
green
blue
hazel
5%other
Practice Test 1
Practice Test 1
GO ON TO THE NEXT PAGE
9. If xx
xx
-+ = , then x =
A. -3
B. 3
D. 9
E. 3
10 . Harriet planned to complete a certain task on
Wednesday, January 1, but because of illness,
the completion date was postponed 48 days.
On which day of the week in February was the
task completed?
A. Monday
B. Tuesday
C. Wednesday
D. Thursday
E. Friday
11. One angle of a triangle is 68°. The other two
angles are in the ratio of 3:4. Which of the
following is the number of degrees in the smallest
angle of the triangle?
Note: Figure not drawn to scale.
12 . If, in the preceding graph, point E has coordinates
(-3, 5) and point F has coordinates (6, -7), then
the length of EF =
C. 7
D. 5
E. 3
E y
x
F
Part II: Practice-Review-Analyze-Practice
13 . A random poll of 2,500 moviegoers throughout
New York found that 1,500 preferred comedies,
500 preferred adventure films, and 500 preferred
dramas. Of the 8,000,000 moviegoers in New
York, which of the following is (are) the most
reasonable estimate(s) drawn from the poll?
I. 1,500,000 prefer comedies.
II. 500,000 prefer dramas.
III. 1,600,000 prefer dramas.
A. I only
B. II only
C. III only
D. I and II only
E. I and Ill only
14 . The horizontal length of each rectangle above is
marked within. What is the total horizontal length
of x + y?
E. It cannot be determined from the information
given.
15 . How will the graph of gx x 5
=+^^hh differ from
the graph of fx x
=^h ?
A. gx^h will be 5 units above fx^h .
B. gx^h will be 5 units below fx^h .
C. gx^h will be 5 units to the right of fx^h .
D. gx^h will be 5 units to the left of fx^h .
E. gx^h will be 25 units above fx^h .
y
Practice Test 1
Practice Test 1
IF YOU FINISH BEFORE TIME IS CALLED, CHECK YOUR WORK ON THIS
SECTION ONLY . DO NOT WORK ON ANY OTHER SECTION IN THE TEST. STOP
Section 9: Mathematics
Time: 25 Minutes
20 Questions
Directions: Solve each problem in this section by using the information given and your own mathematical calcula-
tions, insights, and problem-solving skills. Then select the one correct answer of the five choices given and mark the
corresponding circle on your answer sheet. Use the available space on the page for your scratch work.
Notes
1. All numbers used are real numbers.
2. Calculators may be used.
3. Some problems may be accompanied by figures or diagrams. These figures are drawn as accurately as possible
EXCEPT when it is stated in a specific problem that a figure is not drawn to scale. The figures and diagrams are
meant to provide information useful in solving the problem or problems. Unless otherwise stated, all figures and
diagrams lie in a plane.
Data That Can Be Used for Reference
rectangle
A = lw
Area
triangle
circle
rectangular solid
V = lwh
Volume
right circular cylinder
Pythagorean Relationship
Special T riangles
A circle is composed of 360°
A straight angle measures 180°
The sum of the angles of a triangle is 180°
w
l
h
b
r
M
r
h
l
h
w
a2 + b2 = c 2
C B
A
c
a
b
x
x
Part II: Practice-Review-Analyze-Practice
1. If 2x - 5 = 9, then 3x + 2 =
E. 7
2. On the above number line, what is the point 15
units to the left of point Q?
B. 5
C. 0
D. -9
3. If x = 3, y = 4, and z = -1, what is the value of
2x + 3y2 - z?
4. If cassette tapes cost $2.98 for a package of two
tapes, how much change will Roy receive from a
twenty-dollar bill if he purchases 12 tapes?
Practice Test 1
Practice Test 1
GO ON TO THE NEXT PAGE
D. 7
E. 6
6. Ernie cut a yardstick into two pieces, the larger
piece being six inches more than the smaller.
How could Ernie compute the size of the smaller
piece, x?
A. x + 6 = 36
B. 2x = 36
C. x + x + 6 = 36
D. 2x - 6 = 36
E. 2x + 6 = 30
7. The sum of the digits in the three boxes equals
A. 5
B. 7
C. 9
8. Which of the following ordered pairs (a, b) is
NOT a member of the solution set of 2a - 3b = 6?
A. (6, 2)
B. (-3, -4)
C. (3, 0)
D. ,4 3
E. (0, 2)
x
Part II: Practice-Review-Analyze-Practice
9. Which of the following expresses the perimeter of
the preceding triangle?
A. (2s - 6)(s - 4)
B. ss2
C. 4s
D. 4s + 12
E. 4s - 12
10 . What percent of 3
11. A house is on the market for a selling price of
$64,000. The buyer made a $1,500 deposit, but
fifteen percent of the selling price is needed for the
down payment. How much more money does the
buyer need for the down payment?
12 . The average of 9 numbers is 7, and the average
of 7 other numbers is 9. What is the average of all
16 numbers?
A. 8
s + 4
s + 2
Practice Test 1
Practice Test 1
GO ON TO THE NEXT PAGE
13 . If the volume and the total surface area of a cube
are equal, then what is the length of one edge of
the cube?
A. 2 units
B. 3 units
C. 4 units
D. 5 units
E. 6 units
14 . If ll12 , x = 60°, and w = 2z, then y + w =
15 . If # is a binary operation such that a # b is defined
as ab
ab
+ and (a2 - b2 ≠ 0), then what is the value
of a # b if 2a = b and a ≠ 0 ?
B. 5
C. 2
D. 5
16 . If a pipe can drain a tank in t hours, what part of
the tank does it drain in 3 hours?
A. 3t
B. t
C. t + 3
D. t
E. t - 3
y o
x o z o
w ol1
Part II: Practice-Review-Analyze-Practice
Note: Figure not drawn to scale.
17. In the preceding figure, BD AC= , AB = 34,
BD = 30, and BC = 34. What is the length of AC?
A. 8
18 . What is the area of a square inscribed in a circle
whose circumference is 16π?
19 . 750 times 45 equals P.Therefore, 750 times 44
equals
A. P - 45
B. P - 750
C. P - 1
20. What is the probability that a dart thrown in the
circle with center O above will land in the shaded
A. 2
B. 3
C. 4
D. 6
E. 8
A
B
O
A
B
CD
Practice Test 1
Practice Test 1
IF YOU FINISH BEFORE TIME IS CALLED, CHECK YOUR WORK ON THIS
SECTION ONLY . DO NOT WORK ON ANY OTHER SECTION IN THE TEST. STOP
1. Scott saw that novels had ceased to paint idealized
figures of romance, reviewing Jane Austen's
Emma, and would henceforth copy real life.
A. Scott saw that novels had ceased to paint
idealized figures of romance, reviewing Jane
Austen's Emma, and would henceforth copy
real life.
B. Scott saw that novels had ceased to paint
idealized figures of romance and would
henceforth copy real life, reviewing Jane
Austen's Emma.
C. Scott saw that by copying real life novels had
ceased to paint idealized figures of romance,
reviewing Jane Austen's Emma.
D. Reviewing Jane Austen's Emma, Scott saw
that novels had ceased to paint idealized
figures of romance, and would henceforth
copy real life.
E. Reviewing Jane Austen's Emma, that the
novel had ceased to paint idealized figures of
romance and would henceforth copy real life
was seen by Scott.
2. Immobilizing animals through anesthesia is not a
new technique zoos have used this procedure for
decades.
A. technique zoos
B. technique; zoos
C. technique, zoos
D. technique although zoos
E. technique for the reason that zoos
Part II: Practice-Review-Analyze-Practice
Section 1 0: Writing-Multiple Choice
Time: 10 Minutes
15 Questions
In this section, choose the best answer for each question and blacken the corresponding space on the answer sheet.
Directions: The following questions test correctness and effective expression. In selecting the answer, pay attention to
grammar, diction, sentence structure, and punctuation. In the following questions, part or all of each sentence is under-
lined. The A answer repeats the underlined portion of the original sentence, while the next four offer alternatives.
Choose the answer that best expresses the meaning of the original sentence, and at the same time is grammatically
correct, and stylistically superior. The correct choice should be clear, unambiguous, and concise.
EXAMPLE:
The forecaster predicted rain and the sky was clear.
A. rain and the sky was clear.
B. rain but the sky was clear.
C. rain the sky was clear.
D. rain, but the sky was clear.
E. rain being as the sky was clear.
The correct answer is D.
3. Many small seed companies were privately owned,
but they have been taken over by chemical giants
and they depend on large pesticide sales.
A. Many small seed companies were privately
owned, but they have been taken over by
chemical giants and they depend on large
pesticide sales.
B. Many small seed companies were privately
owned, have been taken over by chemical
giants, and they depend on large pesticide
sales.
C. Many small seed companies are privately
owned, and they have been taken over by
chemical giants that depend on large
pesticide sales.
D. Many small privately owned seed companies
depending on large sales of pesticides have
been taken over by chemical giants.
E. Chemical giants that depend on large
pesticide sales have taken over many small
privately owned seed companies.
4. Drawing on resources that include unpublished
letters and manuscripts, Anne Atkinson has written
a thorough and original biography of Emily
Dickinson.
A. Drawing on resources that include
unpublished letters and manuscripts
B. Drawn on resources that include unpublished
letters and manuscripts
C. She has drawn on resources that include
unpublished letters and manuscripts, and so
D. Unpublished letters and manuscripts are the
resources used, and
E. Drawing on unpublished letters and
manuscripts as her resources
5. The rites of how an adolescent female is initiated
becoming a member of adult society have never
been photographed.
A. of how an adolescent female is initiated
becoming
B. initiating an adolescent female so that she
becomes
C. of the adolescent female's initiation
becoming
D. which initiate an adolescent female and she
becomes
E. by which the adolescent female is initiated
and becomes
6. Manning's book on Nicholas Nickleby is the most
dependable guide to this difficult novel, and it is
also the wittiest account.
A. guide to this difficult novel, and it is also the
wittiest account.
B. guide, and it is also the wittiest account of
this difficult novel.
C. guide to this difficult novel, and the wittiest.
D. guide and also the wittiest account of this
difficult novel.
E. and wittiest guide to this difficult novel.
7. To lose weight rapidly, one must weigh every food
portion carefully, exercise regularly, and you
should only drink water, black coffee, or diet soda.
A. and you should only drink
B. and you should drink only
C. only drinking
D. and drink only
E. and one should drink only
8. Different from any other designs in the show,
Orlando Fashions Company exhibited a collection
made entirely of nylon.
A. Different from any other designs in the show,
B. Different from any designs in the show,
C. With designs different from any others in the
show,
D. Designed differently from others in the show,
E. Different from other designs in the show,
9. As Gordon's army advanced farther into the
interior, and its supply line from the coast became
more and more vulnerable.
A. and its supply line from the coast became
more and more vulnerable.
B. its supply line from the coast became more
and more vulnerable.
C. its supply line from the coast becoming more
and more vulnerable.
D. while its supply line from the coast became
more and more vulnerable.
E. and its supply line from the coast becoming
more and more vulnerable.
Practice Test 1
Practice Test 1
GO ON TO THE NEXT PAGE
10 . The crowned crane lives in the marshlands and
meadows of West Africa, and you can find them in
the open grasslands as well.
A. and you can find them in the open grasslands
as well.
B. and they also live in the open grasslands.
C. and they also can be found in the open
grasslands.
D. and in the open grasslands, as well.
E. and they live also in the open grasslands.
11. The banking system is stronger now than it has
been in many years, which may encourage bankers
to reduce their reserves.
A. years, which may encourage bankers
B. years, and this may encourage bankers
C. years, a condition that may encourage
bankers
D. years, and because of this, bankers may be
encouraged
E. years; this may encourage bankers
12 . This summer, Las Vegas will see a record number
of visitors, and a very high percentage of them
will be children.
A. and a very high percentage of them will be
children.
B. being children in a very high percentage.
C. and children will be among them in a very
high percentage.
D. among whom a very high percentage of them
will be children.
E. and among them will be children in a very
high percentage.
13 . Nature has provided so that nearly every plant-
eating insect has a natural enemy, but most
insecticides kill both.
A. Nature has provided so that nearly every
plant-eating insect has a natural enemy, but
B. Nature has seen to it that nearly every plant-
eating insect has a natural enemy, and
C. Nature provides that nearly every plant-
eating insect has a natural enemy, but
D. Nearly every plant-eating insect has a natural
enemy, but
E. Natural enemies of nearly every plant-eating
insect have been provided by nature, but
14 . By mid-October, black oaks, dogwood, and big-
leaf maples which form splashes of yellow, red
and orange.
A. maples which form splashes
B. maples form splashes
C. maples which are forming splashes
D. maples forming splashes
E. maples that form splashes
15 . Throughout the entire work, Huxley is constantly
repeating that we have become the slaves of
machines.
A. Throughout the entire work, Huxley is
constantly repeating
B. Throughout the entire work, Huxley states
repeatedly
C. Constantly throughout the entire work,
Huxley states
D. Throughout, Huxley repeatedly states
E. Huxley states
Part II: Practice-Review-Analyze-Practice
IF YOU FINISH BEFORE TIME IS CALLED, CHECK YOUR WORK ON THIS
SECTION ONLY . DO NOT WORK ON ANY OTHER SECTION IN THE TEST. STOP
Scoring Practice Test 1
Answer Key for Practice Test 1
Section 2: Critical Reading
Practice Test 1
Practice Test 1
1. A
2. B
3. A
4. C
5. D
6. C
7. B
8. D
9. C
Section 3: Mathematics
1. B
2. C
3. C
4. B
5. C
6. B
7. C
8. A
9. A
Section 4: Writing-Multiple Choice
1. D
2. C
3. A
4. B
5. E
6. D
7. C
8. A
9. C
Section 5: Critical Reading
1. B
2. C
3. D
4. E
5. B
6. A
7. B
8. D
9. B
Section 6: Mathematics
Part II: Practice-Review-Analyze-Practice
1. C
2. E
3. C
4. D
5. E
6. E
7. B
8. C
9. E
Section 7: Critical Reading
1. E
2. D
3. B
4. C
5. B
6. B
7. E
8. E
9. B
Section 8: Mathematics
1. A
2. D
3. C
4. C
5. D
6. D
7. D
8. A
9. A
Section 9: Mathematics
1. B
2. E
3. C
4. B
5. D
6. C
7. E
8. E
9. C
Section 1 0: Writing-Multiple Choice
1. D
2. B
3. E
4. A
5. E
6. E
7. D
8. C
9. B
Analyzing Your Test Results
The charts on the following pages should be used to carefully analyze your results and spot your strengths and weaknesses.
The complete process of analyzing each subject area and each individual problem should be completed for each practice
test. These results should then be reexamined for trends in types of errors (repeated errors) or poor results in specific subject
areas. This reexamination and analysis is of tremendous importance to you in assuring maximum test preparation benefit.
Reviewing the Essay
Have an English teacher, tutor, or someone else with good writing skills read and evaluate your essay using the Essay
Checklist given below. Have your reader evaluate the complete essay as good, average, or marginal. Note that your
paper would actually be scored from 1 to 6 by two trained readers (actual total score 2-12). But since we are trying
only for a rough approximation, the simple good, average, or marginal overall evaluation will give you a general feeling
for your score range.
Use the following checklist to evaluate your essay:
■ Does the essay focus on the topic and complete the assigned task?
(Circle one: Excellent Average Poor)
■ Is the essay well organized, well developed, and consistent in argument?
(Circle one: Excellent Average Poor)
■ Does the essay use specific supporting details?
(Circle one: Excellent Average Poor)
■ Does the writing use correct grammar, usage, punctuation, and spelling?
(Circle one: Excellent Average Poor)
■ Is the handwriting legible?
(Circle one: Excellent Average Poor)
Critical Reading Analysis Sheet
Section 2 Possible Completed Right Wrong
Sentence Completion 1 0
Short Reading Passages 4
Long Reading Passages 1 4
Subtotal 28
Section 5 Possible Completed Right Wrong
Sentence Completion 9
Short Reading Passages 6
Long Reading Passages 1 2
Subtotal 27
Section 7 Possible Completed Right Wrong
Long Reading Passages 1 5
Subtotal 15
Overall Critical Reading Totals 70
Practice Test 1
Practice Test 1
Mathematics Analysis Sheet
Section 3 Possible Completed Right Wrong
Multiple Choice 20
Subtotal 20
Section 6 Possible Completed Right Wrong
Multiple Choice 1 0
Grid-Ins 1 0
Subtotal 20
Section 8 Possible Completed Right Wrong
Multiple Choice 1 5
Subtotal 15
Section 9 Possible Completed Right Wrong
Multiple Choice 20
Subtotal 20
Overall Math Totals 75
Note: Only 3 math sections (about 55 questions) count on your actual exam in the new SAT.
Writing-Multiple-Choice Analysis Sheet
Section 4 Possible Completed Right Wrong
Improving Sentences 7
Identifying Sentence Errors 1 9
Improving Paragraphs 9
Subtotal 35
Section 10 Possible Completed Right Wrong
Improving Sentences 1 5
Subtotal 15
Overall Writing- 50
Multiple-Choice Totals
Part II: Practice-Review-Analyze-Practice
Analysis/Tally Sheet for Problems Missed
One of the most important parts of test preparation is analyzing why you missed a problem so that you can reduce the
number of mistakes. Now that you have taken the practice test and checked your answers, carefully tally your mistakes
by marking them in the proper column.
Reason for Mistakes
Total Simple Misread Lack of Lack of
Missed Mistake Problem Knowledge Time
Section 2: Critical Reading
Section 5: Critical Reading
Section 7: Critical Reading
Subtotal
Section 3: Mathematics
Section 6: Mathematics
Section 8: Mathematics
Section 9: Mathematics
Subtotal
Section 4: Writing-Multiple Choice
Section 1 0: Writing-Multiple Choice
Subtotal
Total Reading, Math and Writing
Reviewing the preceding data should help you determine why you are missing certain problems. Now that you've pin-
pointed the type of error, compare it to other practice tests to spot other common mistakes.
Complete Answers and Explanations for Practice Test 1
Section 2: Critical Reading
Sentence Completion
1. A. The adjective here should pick up the implications of "loved" and "hated," not just one or the other. The word
"controversial," A, accounts for both. The other choices are not specifically related in any way to the rest of the
sentence.
2. B. You need a verb here describing the action of organisms with a meaning like "developed" or "discovered."
The best choice is B, "evolved," developed gradually, which also fits well with the detail of "thousands of years."
The wrong answers describe too conscious an action.
3. A. Here you need words that are contradictory to the two givens: "affectionate" and "alert." "Aloof" A, "cruel"
B, or "selfish" D are possible first words, but "shrewd" B, "lively" C, and "nimble" D are not contradictions of
"alert," so the only possible right answer is A.
Practice Test 1
Practice Test 1
Part II: Practice-Review-Analyze-Practice
4. C. The first adjective offers a choice among five, any one of which would fit the first phrase. Because this fame
is for an unfavorably regarded trait, however, the best choice is "notorious."A hero is "famous," "renowned,"
"illustrious," or "eminent," but a man who talks too much is "notorious." Because the action described confirms
the reputation for long-windedness, "verified" is the only possible choice of the verbs.
5. D. You know that Montana already is a senator who may run for reelection. Therefore, she is the "incumbent,"
the holder of an office. The details of the sentence support this choice. Although the other nouns are not wholly
unsuitable, none of them has any real connection with the details in the rest of the sentence.
6. C. The first noun must be a term that refers to what is pledged to obtain a loan, a word like "pledge," or "surety,"
or "collateral," or "deposit." Only "profit," D, can be eliminated. The verb must mean liquidate or get rid of
because he emerges "free of debt." Only "discharge," C, is left when you eliminate A, B, and E. This confirms
the sense of "collateral" being the best of the four available nouns.
7. B. The missing word describes "absurdist" fiction and is parallel to the word shocking. Clearly, "banal," A,
"plausible," C, "cozy," D, and "familiar," E, will not do. The adjective "radical" means favoring fundamental
change or very leftist.
8. D. The sense of the sentence calls for an adjective expressing strong feelings because the writer is surprised by
this response to an "insignificant" issue. D is the only logical answer.
9. C. The sentence describes a division in the band, avant-garde instrumentalists, and a popular-ballad crooner, so
the first adjective should account for this split. The word "progressive," A, fits only the band, and "old-fashioned,"
B, and "predictable," E, fit the singer. The word "inconsistent" is the best of the choices. The second adjective
should describe "popular ballads," and all except B, "unique," will do.
10 . C. Because she hoped to be undetected, she had to hide the card "furtively," that is, stealthily or surreptitiously.
The words "brazenly," A, and "overtly," B, contradict the opening phrase.
Short Reading Passages
11. A. The fact that associations vary from person to person, depending on personal history, is the point of the
paragraph. C contradicts this point, and D, while a tempting answer, is incorrect. Your culture may help determine
your associations, but it is your own history which is the prime determiner, according to the passage. B is
meaningless here. The reverse of E is true; word association tests are valuable because people's associations
vary and can therefore provide clues to their psychological state.
12 . E. This example illustrates how personal history creates associations. B may seem correct, but to some people,
coffee might be associated with a cigarette, inability to sleep, etc. "Everyone" is the problem word here. A and C
are irrelevant. D draws a conclusion that is not warranted, nor does it strengthen the main point of the paragraph.
13 . C. Lines 9-11 state that this fact has been "recently established." D and E are presented as possibilities, not
certainties. Nothing in the paragraph suggests A, and, according to the paragraph, B is simply untrue because
of the butterfly's short life span.
14 . A. The point of the paragraph is that scientists cannot yet fully explain how the migrating butterfly finds its way.
They don't know enough about how the butterfly navigates to know whether B is correct. Nothing in the passage
either supports or refutes C and D, and E may or may not be true. (Beware of words like "never" and "always" in
answer choices.)
Long Reading Passages
15 . E. Although "correspondence" can mean correlation, agreement, or similarity, here it means communication by
letters. Gauguin's "correspondence" refers to the letters he wrote to France from the South Pacific.
16 . B. Gauguin's letter refers to the quotation from Poe that finds "singularity" (oddness, uniqueness, strangeness)
in perfect beauty, and he is reminded of these lines by the beauty of his first Tahitian model.
17. D. The passage points out that most of the artists before Gauguin had not painted Tahitians realistically, but as
"idealized types," altered to fit European tastes, just the opposite of choice B. The passage goes on to point out
that the Tahitian could "scarcely be distinguished from his African or Asian counterpart."
Practice Test 1
Practice Test 1
18 . A. The reader can infer that Charles Giraud painted Tahitians before Gauguin did, but because the paintings have
not survived, the author cannot know whether Giraud followed other artists and painted to suit European ideas of
beauty or if, like Gauguin, he painted the Tahitians as they really were. It is for this reason the author would like
to see Giraud's work.
19 . C. The passage opposes the terms "Naturalism" and "Symbolism." The naturalistic or realistic in Gauguin is
alluded to in lines 31-32 ("straightforward") and lines 46-47 ("naturalistically"), and lines 52-54 refer to the
nonrealistic "Symbolist aspirations."
20. A. The two impulses in Gauguin that appear to be at odds are his wish to render the Tahitians as they really are
and at the same time to reveal a "poetic image" of the "island's mysterious past." The problem is discussed in the
last 32 lines of the passage.
21. C. The first paragraph is introductory and presents the opposing positions on global warming and greenhouse
gases represented by the climatologist Jim Hansen and the politician John Sununu.
22. B. Although "pit" (the verb) can mean to scar or remove the core of, the meaning here is sets in opposition or
sets in competition.
23. C. Because neither oxygen nor nitrogen absorbs heat, neither A nor B is likely. The amount of carbon dioxide in
the atmosphere can be increased by burning of fossil fuels, D. In choice E, the opposite is more likely to be true
because heat escapes as infrared radiation. Because carbon dioxide absorbs heat, a planet with more in its
atmosphere would be warmer.
24. D. Because oxygen and nitrogen, which are not greenhouse gases, form 99 percent of the atmosphere according
to the second paragraph, the passage does not imply that greenhouse gases make up a large part of the
atmosphere. The second paragraph also tells us that carbon dioxide absorbs large amounts of heat and that the
release of carbon dioxide can lead to warming. The third paragraph adds that clearing and burning forests create
carbon dioxide.
25. A. If greenhouse gases absorb heat and nitrogen does not absorb heat (paragraph 2), then nitrogen is not a
greenhouse gas. The other four are mentioned in the second and third paragraphs of the passage.
26. A. The first statement makes a point that logically questions the Marshall report theory that "without greenhouse
gases to warm things up, the world would become cool in the next century." If so, why was it not cool before
there were greenhouse gases? The passage does not give us any information about economic predictions in the
Marshall report, and in any case, because the report advocates the encouragement of greenhouse gases, this idea
would not undermine its conclusions. Similarly, the third statement would not affect the arguments of the report
because oxygen is not a greenhouse gas.
27. D. The word "skeptic" now usually means a person who habitually questions or doubts even matters generally
accepted.
28. B. The image of Mr. Sununu as a character in a Dracula film was probably intended to amuse the audience and to
make the opponent seem a bit ridiculous. It would also suggest that the claims are melodramatic. A believer in the
danger of too much greenhouse gas in the atmosphere would not be likely to suggest that the danger is imaginary,
so the third statement is very unlikely.
Section 3: Mathematics
1. B. Setting up an equation gives x5
1 2= . Multiplying both sides by 5,
Then x = 10
And 2
2. C. The selling price for 1 dozen at 3 for $0.85 is
Therefore, 6 dozen will yield $3.40 × 6 = $20.40.
The store's cost for 6 dozen at $1.80 per dozen is $1.80 × 6 = $10.80.
Therefore, the profit on 6 dozen of these items will be $20.40 - $10.80, or $9.60.
3. C. If x = -1,
= 0 + 1 + (-1) - 3
= 1 + (-1) - 3
= 0 - 3
= -3
4. B. The union of two sets is the set of elements belonging to set P or set Q or to both sets P and Q.
,,, ,,
PQ
PQ
and
5. C. Substitute 3 for x.
fx x
fx
x
h
hh
6. B. Since ab a b
7 =+ ,
7-- = - + -
=- +
^^ ^^
hhhh
h
Part II: Practice-Review-Analyze-Practice
Practice Test 1
Practice Test 1
8. A. The number of nickels that Angela has is x. Therefore, the total value of those nickels (in cents) is 5x. Angela
also has twice as many dimes as nickels, or 2x. The total value in cents of those dimes is 2x(10), or 20x. Adding
together the value of the nickels and dimes gives 5x + 20x, or 25x.
9. A. If x - 4 = y, then y - x = -4. Therefore, (y - x)3 = (-4)3 = -64.
10 . A. The perimeter of a rectangle with length l and width w is 2l + 2w. Because the perimeter of the rectangle is
10x + 8 and its length is 3x,
perimeter = 2l + 2w
10x + 8 = 6x + 2w
4x + 8 = 2w
2x + 4 = w
Therefore, the width of the rectangle is 2x + 4.
11. E. If x7
10= - , then cross multiplying yields
x
x
x
x
x
x
-+=+
^^ ^ hh h
12 . B. The car travels a total distance of 280 miles in 7 2
hours for the round trip. Its average speed in miles per hour is
== =
You could have used your calculator here and simply divided 280 by 7.5, getting 37.333, or 37 3
13 . C. Because a and b must both be positive or both be negative, choice C, III only, is the only answer that must be
true.
14 . D. The slope (m) of a line passing through the points (x1, y1) and (x2, y2) is
m xx
yy
Part II: Practice-Review-Analyze-Practice
The line passes through (-3, 5) and (2, 9), so
4= --
- =^h
Note that you could eliminate choices A, B, and C because they are all negative slopes, and the diagram shows a
line with a positive slope.
15 . D.
xy
xy
xy
xy
xy
xy
y
x
- - -
-- -
eo
16 . B. ∠ XYZ is inscribed in a semicircle and is therefore a right angle. Therefore, /H17005XYZ is a right triangle and the
Pythagorean theorem states
XY XZ YZ
XZ XY
XZ
XZ
XZ
XZ
XZ
XYZ bh
XZ YZ
is a diameter
area of
O
^^ ^ ^
hhh
hh h h
h
h
h
hh
hh
hh
17. A. If 15 gumballs were picked from the bag, it is possible that 8 of them are red and 7 are white. On the next pick
(the 16th), however, one is assured of having one gumball of each color.
18 . B. Because each letter repeats after every five vowels, divide 327 by 5, and the remainder will determine the
vowel in that place of the pattern. Since 327 ÷ 5 = 65 with a remainder of 2, the remainder of 2 indicates that the
second vowel (e) will be the 327th letter.
19 . C. Let x = length of equal sides in feet and x + 8 = length of base in feet.
x
x + 8
x
Practice Test 1
Practice Test 1
Since the perimeter is 89 feet,
x + x + x + 8 = 89
x
Therefore, the length of the base is x + 8, or 35 feet.
20. A. Because the perimeter of the rhombus is 40, each side has length 10. Because the diagonals of a rhombus are
perpendicular and bisect each other,
x
x
x
x
x
The area of a quadrilateral with perpendicular diagonals d1 and d2 is
area 12$=
^ `h j
Section 4: Writing-Multiple Choice
Improving Sentences
1. D. The correct version should include either "people's" or "players'" to keep from changing the meaning. Since
the word "players" has already been used in the sentence, "people's" is the better choice. The second part of the
sentence specifically contrasts the two behaviors, so "but" is a better choice of conjunction than "and." The
sentence contains two independent clauses which should be separated by a conjunction and a comma.
2. C. The problem in this sentence is the ambiguous "they." To which of the two parties does it refer? C uses more
words, but makes clear which party will win the election. Both D and E are also ambiguous.
3. A. The original version is correct. It consists of a series of four adjectives, with one adverbial modifier ("grossly").
It is also the most concise of the five versions of the sentence. There is no need to break up the series of adjectives,
and the other versions add unnecessary words. Choice D, by changing "grossly" to "gross," changes the meaning
of the sentence.
x
x
4. B. The error in the original sentence is a comma splice, the use of a comma to join two complete sentences. D,
omitting the comma, is even worse. B's use of a semicolon corrects the sentence. Remember that the semicolon is
usually the equivalent of a period, not a comma. E needs a comma to be correct; C is wordy and awkward, though
the punctuation is not wrong.
5. E. Up to the comma, this is a complete sentence, but the second half has a subject but no main verb. Choices A,
B, C, and D have only the participle "accepting" (a verbal adjective, not a verb). E has a main verb, "accept," and
is the only version that is not a sentence fragment.
6. D. The conjunction "but" is a better choice than "and," because the two parts of the sentence present a contrast.
In A, B, and C, the sentence needlessly shifts from the passive ("is given") to the active voice.
7. C. Again, the "but" is a better conjunction choice than the "and." Although B is not grammatically wrong, it is
wordier than C, the most concise of the five choices. The shift from the active verbs to the participles in D and E
disrupts the parallel structure.
Identifying Sentence Errors
8. A. There is an error in the case of the pronoun "I." It is the object of the verb "hired" and should be "me." "The
owners hired I," would be easy to spot as an error. Don't let words between related parts of a sentence distract you.
9. C. As it stands, two unlike objects are compared. The sentence says pistachios cost more than orchards; what it
intended to say was imported pistachios cost more than California pistachios.
10 . A. The verb "are" (a plural) does not agree with the singular "agreement." Again, the error would be easy to see
if the two words were together. The plural "they" is correct, as it refers to "House" and "Senate."
11. B. The verb tense is wrong here. The use of "tomorrow" tells us the action is to take place in the future, but
"departed" is a past tense. It should be "will depart."
12 . E. The sentence has no errors. The verb tense sequence using the past perfect "had completed" followed by the
past "considered" is correct.
13 . A. The pronoun "who" should replace the pronoun "which." To refer to persons, use "who;" to refer to things or
animals, use "which."
14 . B. The comparative here repeats itself, since "worse" already means "more bad." You could say something like
"more harmful" or "worse," but not "more worse."
15 . C. The choice of preposition here is not idiomatic. We say "concede to," not "with."
16 . D. The error is a double negative. The "hardly any" avoids the error, but "scarcely no" has two negatives.
A sentence testing this error will probably use either "hardly" or "scarcely" as one of the negatives. A "not"
and a "no" ("I don't have no money.") is too easy.
17. C. This is an agreement error, common in constructions using "either/or." Here the subject of the plural verb
"are" is the singular "attempt," or the singular "bombing." It cannot be both, since the point of the sentence is
that one or the other is responsible.
18 . D. An often-tested idiom error is the interchange of an infinitive ("to dismantle") and a prepositional phrase with
a gerund ("on dismantling"). Here, the noun "insistence" requires the prepositional phrase. If, however, the
sentence had read "refusal" instead of "insistence," the infinitive would be correct.
19 . C. The use of the future tense of the verb ("will believe") makes no sense in this context. The present tense,
"believe," should have been used.
20. E. The sentence uses the correlative "not only...but also" which often introduces errors of parallelism, but here
there are no errors.
21. C. This is another agreement error; the singular subject "business" requires the singular verb "has developed."
22. A. The subject of the second half of the sentence is "you," and since it is not underlined, it cannot be changed.
To keep the pronouns consistent, the "we" at the beginning must also be "you."
Part II: Practice-Review-Analyze-Practice
23. C. The verb form "had flew" is the error here. Either the past tense "flew" or the past perfect "had flown" would
be correct.
24. B. There is an adverb-adjective confusion here. The adjective "fond" should be used to modify the noun "good-bye."
25. D. The sentence begins with a singular "ambassador," but changes to an unspecified plural "they" in the main
clause. They who?
26. E. The sentence is correct. The singular "its" refers to the singular MTV and the verb tense is reasonable.
Improving Paragraphs
27. E. Both sentences are very wordy: "stage of life" is used twice, "life," three times, and "all throughout" is
redundant. The revision in B and E gets rid of the repetitions of "stage," but B keeps the wordy "that occurs all."
The best choice is E.
28. D. There are two problems here: the lack of parallelism in "with establishing" and "to separate," and the pronoun
agreement with the singular "adolescent." B and E make the phrases parallel, but use the plural pronoun "their."
D has the singular "his," and parallel infinitives "to establish" and "to separate."
29. A. One problem with this essay is its vague use of the word "separation." In the second paragraph, the essay
deals with the literal separation caused by events like divorce or death. But the first paragraph is not concerned
with a physical separation. The adolescent may be psychologically distanced from his parents, but the separation
is metaphorical. Choices B, C, and D are not "unlike the first paragraph" and E is untrue.
30. D. The twelfth sentence is not really needed here. It repeats what is implicit in sentence 11. The rest of the
paragraph is about kinds of separation, rather than their effect.
31. D. Without the comma we may read "our courage" as the object of the verb "develop:" "as we develop our
courage." In this sentence, "develop" is intransitive, that is, does not take an object.
32. D. A good revision of this sentence will eliminate the repetition of "reasons" as well as the vague and pompous
"category of reasons" and "enterprise." D keeps the meaning intact, and does so with the greatest clarity and
fewest words.
33. E. The sentence could do without A, B, C, and D, and the word "trying" as well. The slimmed-down sentence
will read: The easiest to recognize is to avoid an unpleasant chore.
34. A. The paragraph offers three plausible reasons to explain why the writer procrastinates.
35. B. The paragraph still reads smoothly without sentence 15, which does little more than repeat the content of
sentence 14: that procrastination produces guilt and anxiety.
Section 5: Critical Reading
Sentence Completion
1. B. The "also" in the second half of the sentence signals that the verb is parallel to "prevent" in the first half. You
can eliminate C and D. The first adjective must mean something like reasonable or sensible, so B "logical" is a
better choice than A "fanciful" or E "idle," which mean just the opposite.
2. C. The first noun must mean something like substitute but a word that will fit with the preposition "to." Choice A
"answer" is possible, C "alternative" is a good answer, and D "rejoinder" might work. The phrase "responsible
for" A makes little sense in this context, and "involved in" D is awkward. The phrase "subject to" is clearly the
best of the three and C the best of the five choices.
3. D. The logic of the sentence suggests that the missing verb must mean something like prevent or decrease.
Choices B "augment" (increase) and C "foster" are the opposite of what is needed. Neither "explain" A nor
"exculpate" (excuse) E makes much sense, although "deter" (discourage, keep from doing) fits well.
Practice Test 1
Practice Test 1
of the mountains," so the first blank must be a noun similar in effect to "smoke," and the second blank requires
an adjective with pleasant denotation. In A and B the nouns are possible, but the adjectives are not. In C and D,
the noun choices cannot fit. Choice E correctly has the bad "hustle-bustle" and the good "exhilarating."
5. B. A situation requiring the choice between two unpleasant alternatives is the definition of the word "dilemma"
and what this sentence describes. Some of the other choices are plausible, but because "dilemma" so exactly fits
the situation, it is clearly the best.
6. A. The word "combining" should alert you to look for a noun here that denotes a coming together of East and
West. Choices B, C, and D are clearly wrong. Choice A "fusion," the union of different things, fits well.
7. B. The noun referring to what "allowed voters to decide" on an issue could be "statute" A, "referendum" B (the
most precise word), or "bill" D. The missing adverb that describes the 9-to-1 win must denote a very resounding
margin of victory. Neither "meager" A nor "narrow" D will do. Again, the best answer uses the most specific
noun as well as the most suitable adverb.
8. D. The first blank requires a noun describing something a novel is based on. Choices A, C, and D are possible.
B and E are eliminated by the use of "upon which." The second word must praise the book because it is parallel
with "intelligence" and the novel has been called "fine." Choices A and C must be eliminated, and only D
remains.
9. B. The adjective "anachronistic" means representing something as existing at other than its proper time, such as
a washing machine in the Middle Ages or a knight in armor at a football game. Choice A is a possibility, although
B is more exact.
Short Reading Passages
10 . E. Note lines 9-11. The tone of the passage is not critical, and therefore A and D are not good answers. B is a
secondary point, not the main purpose of the paragraph. C, while it may be a true statement, is not relevant to this
passage.
11. B. What Salk originally believed was "a dull but dependable investment" became a milestone in medical history
that made him famous; his original belief was therefore ironic in terms of the results. The other answers are
straightforward and contain no ironies.
12 . E. See lines 11-13. The author believes the opposite of A, C, and D, and does not express an opinion on B. The
point of the passage is that debates have become less and less informative and the candidates less and less
forthright.
13 . C. Even without knowing the definition of the word, you can determine that this is the only choice that makes
sense in context. B, D, and E all contradict the picture the author gives of candidates who are less than forthright
and who are afraid of saying anything that might "ruffle feathers." A is completely unrelated to "elliptical."
14 . A. The author of Passage 2 cites B (lines 7-8), C (lines 5-6), D (lines 10-11), and E (lines 12-14). The author
does NOT cite, however, any evidence that these positive effects have increased voter turnout.
15 . C. For example, Passage 1 uses words like "boob tube" and "sound bites" and asks a sarcastic rhetorical question
at the end of the passage. Passage 2, on the other hand, presents points in a straightforward fashion. A is not
accurate because "philosophical" is an inappropriate characterization of Passage 2. The tone used in Passage 1 is
not like the tone in Passage 2, B, and D isn't an accurate characterization of either passage. E is simply too vague.
Long Reading Passages
16 . B. The passage explicitly refers to Celia and Dorothea as sisters. Although it does not mention their father's
death, you know that the jewels belonged to their mother, and because an uncle, not her father, gave them to
Dorothea, it may be that the father is dead and they are in the uncle's care.
17. D. That Dorothea has started an "infant school" in the village and is busy with plans for some buildings tells you
at once that she is active and generous. No details in the passage suggest that she is prying, idle, ambitious, or
ineffectual, although she may be rich or philanthropic.
Part II: Practice-Review-Analyze-Practice
18 . B. The preceding sentence tells you that Dorothea's eyes are "full of laughter," and her tone when she speaks
again is "full" and "cordial." She is teasing Celia good-naturedly, making fun of her sister's remark that it is
exactly "six months today." In this dialogue, it is Celia who has planned what she will say, and Dorothea speaks
spontaneously. Dorothea has probably forgotten all about the jewels, and Celia has probably been thinking about
them for some time.
19 . D. The phrase means disrespectful or lacking in respect. The reader must recognize that the verb "want" here
means to lack, not the more common to wish for. Choice C confuses "wanting" and "wanton."
20. D. Celia does not wish to have all the jewels, although she does want a share, and she expects to wear them.
Unlike Dorothea, she is not at all Puritanical. She correctly anticipates that Dorothea might object to wearing
jewelry, so she has prepared this defense on the moral grounds that she thinks will best convince Dorothea.
21. C. Dorothea, who does not care about the jewels herself, has simply not realized that Celia really wants to wear
them. In lines 42-45, the reader is told that this "discovery" is astonishing to her, and the moment she realizes
Celia's true feeling, she rushes to open the cabinet. Celia's arguments would have been more effective if she had
simply told Dorothea of her real wishes because Dorothea loves her sister and is eager to make her happy. Notice
that Dorothea has said that the jewels would not be worn only before she realizes what Celia really wishes.
22. A. "Deprecation" is disapproval, or protest, as is suggested in this sentence by Dorothea's saying "no."A lessening
is a "depreciation," and a removal is a "deprivation."
23. A. The adjective in this context comes from the verb meaning to annoy, to irk, as in to try one's patience. In some
contexts, "trying" might mean attempting or determining, but here, irksome is the best definition.
24. E. The "Puritanic toleration" is Dorothea's. She has given up all the jewels to Celia and even encouraged her to
wear them. Although this is in one way pleasing to Celia, it does put Dorothea in a position of moral superiority,
which Celia finds annoying.
25. C. Dorothea is the Puritan, and Celia is the "unenthusiastic sister"; that is, one who has not adopted the religious
extremes of self-denial, such as not wearing jewels.
26. D. Although some answers here describe Dorothea accurately, only D points to an inconsistency. Dorothea
regards wearing jewelry as somehow immoral, and yet, because she sees that Celia really wants to wear the
jewels, she encourages her to do so. What is right for her sister would not be right for her.
27. C. The passage is centrally concerned with delineating the two sisters. Although there is some mild comedy at
the expense of both, the passage is not satiric, and it reveals as much love as friction between the sisters. They are
not alike, and though Celia may take pleasure in jewels, the passage is not about the dangers of materialism. The
author, the reader senses, is amused by and fond of both of these young women.
Section 6: Mathematics
1. C. In the series 8, 9, 12, 17, 24. . . ,
Therefore, the difference between the next term and 24 must be 9, or
x - 24 = 9
Therefore, the next term in the series must be 33.
2. E. 4
Change 4
Practice Test 1
Practice Test 1
3. E. The area of a triangle is 2
Base AB of the triangle is 4 units (because from A to the y-axis is 2 units and from the y-axis to B is 2 units).
Height BC of the triangle is 6 units (3 units from B to the x-axis and another 3 units to C). Note that ∠ B is a right
angle. So
Area of triangle ##
4. D. You should have a working knowledge of these expressions:
Sum: The result of addition.
Difference: The result of subtraction.
Product: The result of multiplication.
Quotient: The result of division.
Therefore, the product of two numbers may be represented as (x)(y). The difference of the two numbers may be
either x - y or y - x. The term twice indicates that the expression is to be multiplied by 2. Therefore, the entire
expression breaks down as follows:
5. E. If 4n = 64, then n = 3 (since 4 × 4 × 4 = 64)
Now plug 3 in for n.
6. E. fz z
zz
+-^h is undefined when z2 - 25 = 0, since the denominator of a fraction cannot be equal to 0.
So set z2 - 25 equal to 0 and solve.
z = -5 or z = 5
The product of two numbers is equal to twice the difference of the two numbers
C (2,3)
O x
y
A (-2,-3) B (2,-3)
Part II: Practice-Review-Analyze-Practice
Practice Test 1
Practice Test 1
7. B. Because D is between A and B on AB, you know that the sum of the lengths of the smaller segments AD and
DB is equal to the length of the larger segment AB.
Therefore, AB = AD + DB
AB - AD = AD + DB - AD
AB - AD = DB
8. C. Solve the equation as follows:
x x
xx x x
xx
xx
xx
xx
xx
xx
or
or
-+ =
-= +=
== -
h
h
hh
9. E. , z6 6 1 is even
=- and , z7 7 1 is odd
So,
-= +- -
__ ii
10 . A. Since ∠ Y is inscribed in a semicircle, ∠ Y is a right angle. So using the Pythagorean theorem you get,
XY YZ XZ
XZ
XZ
XZ
XZ
XZ
hhh
h
h
h
Grid-In Questions
11. Answer: 94. Since x = -4,
A BD
Part II: Practice-Review-Analyze-Practice
12 . Answer: 9.49. For a 25-minute call, the first 3 minutes will cost $2.45, and the additional 22 minutes will cost
$.32 per minute. The cost (C) for the call will be
13 . Answer: 70. Let n = the original price of the jacket. 80% of n is $56.
n = $70
14 . Answer: 4. The volume of a cube with side of length x is x3. Therefore,
x
x
x
15 . Answer: 480. You can quickly solve this problem by using your calculator. Total the four listed items:
$840 + $460 + $320 + $120 = $1,740. Subtract $1,740 from the given total: $2,220 - $1,740 = $480. The lab
workbooks cost $480.
16 . Answer: 50. Begin by choosing a simple fraction, 100
, for example. If the numerator is tripled and the denominator is
doubled, the resulting fraction is 200
, or 1 2
. So the new fraction represents a 50% increase over the original fraction.
17. Answer: 20. Since ll12 , the alternate interior angles have the same measure and
18 . Answer: 640. The phrase how much more indicates subtraction. Clothing was 13% of the total. Insurance was 5%
of the total. So 13% - 5%, or 8%, more of the total of $8,000 was spent on clothing than on insurance.
insurance
food
rent
clothing
travel
$8000 Total Per Year
x
xx
Practice Test 1
Practice Test 1
Angle PXN is 90°, so the ratio of ∠ MQP to ∠ PXN is 40/90, or 4/9.
20. Answer: 48. Set up the equations as follows: Let t be the length of time it will take the plane to overtake the bus.
Then t + 4 is the time that the bus has traveled before the plane starts. The distance the bus has traveled by 1:00
p.m. is 50(t + 4) because distance equals rate times time (d = rt). The distance the plane will travel is 300t. Now,
equating these two (they will have to travel the same distance for one to overtake the other) gives 50(t + 4) = 300t.
Solve the equation as follows.
Therefore, t5
Four-fifths of an hour ( 5
× 60) is 48 minutes. Therefore, it will take 48 minutes for the plane to overtake the bus.
Section 7: Critical Reading
Long Reading Passages
1. E. The sentence on Lope de Vega's play does all three. It gives an example of a play by a Spanish playwright
using Columbus as a hero; it shows that Columbus's reputation had reached to the popular theater; and it gives
an example of Columbus in his symbolic role as the "embodiment of that spirit driving humans to explore and
discover."
2. D. The best of the five definitions here is "inclined." Although the verb "dispose" can mean to arrange or to give
away, the context here makes clear that the meaning is something like not inclined to struggle against the myth of
Columbus, and the next sentence, as well as the rest of the paragraph, confirms this meaning.
3. B. The nouns used for "mold" here-pattern, manner, model, shape, or style-are all adequate; "romantic" here
is best defined by idealized. The word is explained further by the phrase "favored in the century's literature," and
the quotations from Irving that follow depict an idealized rather than a visionary, fictitious, or escapist hero.
4. C. Since "ambition" and "magnanimity" are direct quotations from Irving, neither is possible. The word
"mined" expresses no judgment, and "palliating" refers neutrally to Irving's inadequate explanation. The use
of "Perhaps" expresses the author's reluctance to accept Irving's assessment of Columbus.
5. B. The first paragraph surveys Columbus's reputation in the sixteenth and seventeenth centuries; the second,
third, and fourth deal with the nineteenth century. Although the last paragraph predicts a reevaluation in the
twentieth century, the passage does not deal with the hostile criticism of the explorer.
6. B. The fourth paragraph explains how the nineteenth-century Columbus reflected what that period most valued,
and the last paragraph refers to people creating "the Columbus they want to believe in." The account of nineteenth-
century historians' indifference to the Columbus documents discovered in 1825 contradicts the notion that history
is truth as it is known at the time of writing.
7. E. Each of the questions reveals more of the author's ideas about the Europeans at the time of Columbus's
voyages. The passage goes on to show how these limitations led to the exploitation of the New World. The
paragraph does not defend or justify their actions.
8. E. All three are accurate descriptions of the effects of the phrase. The phrase "a foreign, heathen people, half
naked and befeathered, ignorant of cities and kings and metal and laws, and unschooled in all that the Ancients
held virtuous" is the European view of the native Americans as inferior, contemptuous of their ignorance of
Greece and Rome, which had become important to Europe in the age of discovery. The point of view of this
phrase is that of the fifteenth-century European, not that of the twentieth-century author.
9. B. The second paragraph refers to new foods and medicines found in the New World.
10 . A. The passage presents the biological outlook as one in which humans have a sense of being at one with nature,
where humans' relation to earth and all its life forms is more important than their relation to other humans.
Choices B and E are just what the biological outlook is not. Choices C and D are concerned with economic rather
than ecological well-being.
11. B. The passage argues that, properly understood, the discovery might have brought regeneration to Europe, but
the Europeans, tragically, could only exploit and destroy the new-found lands. The passage does criticize this
European failure, but this criticism is not its real point. The passage does not describe the benefits of the
discovery A, and it is by no means objective E.
12 . E. The last paragraph of Passage 1 refers to "a major reassessment of Columbus's reputation," and Passage 2
presents a view of the consequences of Columbus's voyages totally unlike the heroic adulation of the first four
paragraphs of the first passage.
13 . D. Passage 2 presents a highly personal, highly emotional, judgmental, philosophical view of Columbus's
discovery. But it is not more historical than Passage 1. In fact, it presents only the view of its twentieth-century
author, and Passage 1 samples opinions from several periods.
14 . C. The style of Passage 2 is characterized by its use of words in series, repetition, parallel phrases, and rhetorical
questions. It does not use understatement. Some readers, no doubt, would argue that it depends on overstatement.
15 . B. The first two statements are just, but although Passage 1 focuses on Columbus's reputation, Passage 2 does
not even mention Columbus by name. The second passage does reevaluate the discovery of America. The second
passage also presents an interpretation of the voyages of discovery that reflects the late twentieth-century concern
for the wisdom of ancient cultures, for ecology, and for the dangers of warring against nature.
Section 8: Mathematics
1. A. Since the difference between any two consecutive odd numbers is 2, the next odd number after 2x + 13 would be
2. D. The amount of discount was $120 - $90 = $30. The rate of discount is a percent, so
x
percent
of number
is number=
Cross multiplying
x
x
x
Therefore, the rate of discount was 25%.
Part II: Practice-Review-Analyze-Practice
Practice Test 1
Practice Test 1
Squaring both sides,
Therefore, x = 25.
5. D. Average = x
x
x
x
+++ =
+++ =
6. D. According to the graph, 20% have hazel eyes and 40% have brown eyes. This means that there are twice as
many brown-eyed people as there are hazel-eyed people.
62 = people with hazel eyes
2 × 62 = 124 people with brown eyes
7. D. The most the trip would cost is when gas costs $1.12 and the mileage is 16 mpg. Therefore, $1.12 × (480/16) =
$33.60. The least would be $0.96 × (480/24) = $19.20. The difference is therefore $14.40.
8. A. The perimeter of a rectangle equals 2l + 2w, where l is the length and w is the width. If the length and width
are increased by x, the perimeter will be
2(l + x) + 2(w + x)
= 2l + 2x + 2w + 2x
= 2l + 2w + 4x
which is an increase of 4x units.
9. A. Since xx
xx
-+ == , cross multiply to get
-5x + 7 = -4x + 10
-x + 7 = 10
-x + 7 - 7 = 10 - 7
-x = 3
x = -3
10 . B. Forty-eight days late is one day shy of exactly 7 weeks (7 weeks = 7 × 7 = 49 days). If the job were finished
in 49 days, then it would have been completed on the same day, Wednesday. Because 48 is one day less than
7 weeks, however, the job was completed one day earlier than Wednesday: Tuesday.
11. C. Let 3x = one angle and 4x = other angle.
Therefore, the smallest angle of the triangle is 48°.
12 . B. If two points have coordinates (x1, y1) and (x2, y2), the distance, d, between these points is defined to be
dx x y y 12 12
=- + -
^ _h i
Since E has coordinates (-3, 5) and F has coordinates (6, -7), the distance between E and F is
=- - +- -
hh
hh
13 . C. III only. The random sample indicates that 1,500 out of 2,500 New York moviegoers prefer comedies, or 60% of
those polled prefer comedies. Of those polled, 500 out of 2,500, or 20%, prefer dramas. Therefore, out of 8,000,000
total New York moviegoers, 60% should be found to prefer comedies (4,800,000), and 20% (1,600,000) should be
found to prefer dramas. Only III reflects either of these estimates.
14 . E. The horizontal length of x cannot be determined because there is no indication of the overlapping length of the
rectangle to the left of x. If x cannot be determined, then x + y cannot be determined.
15 . D. Adding a positive number to the domain variable shifts the graph of a function to the left.
Hence gx^h will be 5 units to the left of fx^h .
Section 9: Mathematics
1. B. Solve for x.
2x - 5 = 9
Then x = 7
Now substitute 7 for x.
3x + 2 = 3(7) + 2
2. E. Note that since there is a mark between +7 and +9, that mark must equal +8. Therefore, each mark equals 1.
Counting back, point Q is at +5. Therefore, 15 units to the left of +5 would be +5 - 15 = -10.
Part II: Practice-Review-Analyze-Practice
Practice Test 1
Practice Test 1
4. B. To purchase twelve tapes, Roy must buy six packages. At $2.98 per package, he spends $17.88. His change
from a twenty-dollar bill will be $20.00 - $17.88 = $2.12.
5. D.
+ =+
6. C. If we call the smaller piece x, then the larger piece (6 inches bigger) must be x + 6. Since the two pieces
together equal a yardstick,
x + (x + 6) = 36
x + x + 6 = 36
7. E. For the multiplication problem to work correctly, the figures must be
Therefore, the sum of the boxed digits is 15.
8. E. In the ordered pair (0, 2), a = 0 and b = 2. For 2a - 3b,
Therefore, the ordered pair (0, 2) is not a member of the solution sets of 2a - 3b = 6.
9. C. The perimeter is the sum of all sides. Therefore,
sss
s
s
s
ss
perimeter-++++=
^^ ^ hhh
10 . C. of number
is number
percent=
x
Cross multiplying,
x
x
11. C. Fifteen percent of the selling price is needed for a down payment. Since the selling price of the house is
$64,000, 15% of the selling price equals
The buyer has already paid $1,500 toward the deposit. To figure how much more money is needed for the down
payment, subtract $1,500 from $9,600.
12 . B. If the average of 9 numbers is 7, then the sum of these numbers must be 9 × 7, or 63. If the average of 7
numbers is 9, then the sum of these numbers must be 7 × 9, or 63. The sum of all 16 numbers must be 63 + 63,
or 126. Therefore, the average of all 16 numbers must be
7' == =
13 . E. Let x equal the length of a side of the cube. The volume V = x3, and the surface area S = 6x2. Therefore, x = 6.
14 . E. Since ll12 , the corresponding angles formed on lines l1 and l2 are equal.
15 . E. The value of a # b is
ab
ab
If 2a = b, plug in 2a for b.
aa
aa
aa
aa
a
a
+ = -
+ =- =- =-
h
h
16 . D. Since it takes the pipe t hours to drain the tank completely, it will drain 1/t part of the tank each hour.
Therefore, in three hours, it will drain 3(1/t), or 3/t, part of the tank.
y o
z o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
y
o
w
o
z
o
z
o
Part II: Practice-Review-Analyze-Practice
Practice Test 1
Practice Test 1
17. D. Since AB = BE = 34, /H17005ABC is an isosceles triangle and altitude BD will bisect AC. Since /H17005BDC is a right
triangle, use the Pythagorean theorem, which says
BC BD CD
x
x
x
x
x
hhh
hh
Therefore, CD = 16 = AD
AC = AD + DC
18 . C. Circumference = πd.
d
d
dd
diameter of circle diagonal of square
area of square 2
1 product of diagonals
i
hh
Therefore, the area of the square is 128.
Alternate method: Using the Pythagorean theorem for isosceles right triangles gives x2 + x2 = 162, 2x2 = 256, and
x2 = 128, which is the area of the square.
A
B
CD
x x
Part II: Practice-Review-Analyze-Practice
19 . B. Drawing a picture may be helpful. 750 × 45 equals P.
Note that 750 times 44 is the same as above but with one less circle. Therefore, it equals P - 750. If this concept
is still difficult to understand, think in terms of dollars. You are paid $750 each week for 45 weeks. Therefore,
your total pay (P) is $750 times 45. Suppose that you work only 44 weeks, however. Then your total pay will be
P - one week's pay, or P - $750.
20. D. Since there are 360% in a circle, the shaded region represents 60°/360° or 6
of the circle. Hence the probability
that a dart will land in the shaded region is 6
Section 1 0: Writing-Multiple Choice
Improving Sentences
1. D. The problem here is a misplaced modifier. The participial phrase "reviewing Jane Austen's Emma, modifies
"Scott," and should appear as close to the noun it modifies as possible. The solution is D, which puts the phrase
at the beginning of the sentence, immediately followed by the word it modifies.
2. B. There are two complete sentences here, but no conjunction or punctuation to join them. The run-on sentence
can be corrected by putting a period or a semicolon at the end of the first sentence (after "technique"). Choices D
and E change the meaning of the sentence, and need a comma.
3. E. The original version has an ambiguous pronoun (does the second "they" refer to the seed or the chemical
companies?), is wordy ("they" is used twice), and shifts from active to passive voice. B has the ambiguous
pronoun and the active-passive shift. C is wordy and has the active-passive shift. D corrects these problems but
distorts the meaning. E solves all the problems.
4. A. Though the sentence begins with a participle, "Drawing" does not dangle, but modifies Anne Atkinson, which
immediately follows. The original version is the best of the five, avoiding the verbosity of C, the passive voice of
D, the awkward tense change of B, and the slight change of meaning in E.
5. E. C is attractively concise, but is so shortened that it doesn't quite make sense. The two verbs here, "initiate"
and "become," are equally important, and can be made parallel as in E; A and B subordinate one or the other.
6. E. All of these sentences are grammatical, but E is the most concise in normal word order. C uses the same
words, but the word order is unconventional, making "wittiest" an afterthought.
7. D. We can eliminate A and B because they use "you"; but the sentence began with the pronoun "one" (the third,
not the second person) as the subject. E corrects this error, but the repetition of the "one should" breaks the
parallel verbs without a repeated subject. D keeps the parallel use of active verbs, while C replaces the verb with
a participle.
8. C. Choices A, B, D, and E are adjectival phrases that modify the designs or collection, not the company. The
designs, not the company, are "different." With the "with designs" phrase, the phrase now logically refers to
Orlando Fashions Company, which follows it.
9. B. The sentence is a fragment in all four versions except B. Here the first clause is dependent, and the main clause
has a subject ("supply line") and a main verb ("became"). Though both A and D also use "became," the clauses are
still dependent, because the conjunctions ("and," and "while") join them to the initial dependent clause. The
"becoming" is a participle, not a verb.
10 . D. The original version needlessly shifts from a third person subject ("the crane") to a second person ("you"). C
shifts from an active to a passive verb. Using the prepositional phrase, as in D, eliminates the need for the "they."
45 of these
Practice Test 1
Practice Test 1
11. C. Strict grammarians favor a pronoun having a single word as its antecedent. In this sentence, the pronouns
"which" and "this" refer to the idea that the banking system is stronger but not to a single word. A, B, D, and E
are alike in this reference. Given the choice, C is preferable since its pronoun, "that," does refer to a single word:
"condition."
12 . A. The original version is the best choice here. B is the only one that is shorter, but it is too short to make sense.
The other choices are not bad, but they are wordier than A. So long as you can be sure the meaning is the same
and the grammar is right, choose the version with the fewest words.
13 . D. The issue here is does the omission of a phrase like "nature has provided" or its equivalent change the
meaning of the sentence. Clearly D is the most concise, and "but" is preferable to "and." Since the clause also
uses the adjective "natural," the "nature has provided" phrase is redundant.
14 . B. As it stands, this is a sentence fragment; it has no main verb, since "form" is in a dependent clause. The same
problem exists in C and E, while D is a participle not a verb. In B, "form" is the main verb of a sentence with
"maples" the subject.
15 . D. This is another verbose sentence. If you say "throughout," there is no need to say "the entire work" also, since
"throughout" means "all the way through." Choice E pares too much from the sentence, losing the sense of both
"throughout" (where) and "constantly" (how often).
Answer Sheets for Practice Test 2
(Remove These Sheets and Use Them to Write Your Essay and Mark Your Answers)
Section 1
Begin your essay on this page and continue on the next page if necessary. Do not write outside the essay boxes provided.
Section 2 Section 3 Section 4 Section 5
A EDCB
A EDCB
A EDCB
A EDCB
A EDCB
A EDCB
A EDCB
A EDCB
A EDCB
A EDCB
A EDCB
A EDCB
A EDCB
A EDCB
A EDCB
A EDCB
A EDCB
A EDCB
A EDCB
A EDCB
A EDCB
A EDCB
A EDCB
A EDCB
A EDCB
A EDCB
A EDCB
A EDCB
A EDCB
A EDCB
A EDCB
A EDCB
A EDCB
A EDCB
A EDCB
A EDCB
A EDCB
A EDCB
A EDCB
A EDCB
A EDCB
A EDCB
A EDCB
A EDCB
A EDCB
A EDCB
A EDCB
A EDCB
A EDCB
A EDCB
A EDCB
A EDCB
A EDCB
A EDCB
A EDCB
A EDCB
A EDCB
A EDCB
A EDCB
A EDCB
A EDCB
A EDCB
A EDCB
A EDCB
A EDCB
A EDCB
A EDCB
A EDCB
A EDCB
A EDCB
A EDCB
A EDCB
A EDCB
A EDCB
A EDCB
A EDCB
A EDCB
A EDCB
A EDCB
A EDCB
A EDCB
A EDCB
A EDCB
A EDCB
A EDCB
A EDCB
A EDCB
A EDCB
A EDCB
A EDCB
A EDCB
A EDCB
A EDCB
A EDCB
A EDCB
A EDCB
A EDCB
A EDCB
A EDCB
A EDCB
A EDCB
A EDCB
A EDCB
A EDCB
A EDCB
A EDCB
A EDCB
A EDCB
A EDCB
A EDCB
Section 6
.. .
.. .
.. .
A EDCB
A EDCB
A EDCB
A EDCB
A EDCB
10 A EDCB
A EDCB
A EDCB
A EDCB
A EDCB
Section 6 (continued)
Section 7 Section 8 Section 9 Section 10
A EDCB
A EDCB
A EDCB
A EDCB
A EDCB
A EDCB
A EDCB
A EDCB
A EDCB
A EDCB
A EDCB
A EDCB
A EDCB
A EDCB
A EDCB
A EDCB
A EDCB
A EDCB
A EDCB
A EDCB
A EDCB
A EDCB
A EDCB
A EDCB
A EDCB
A EDCB
A EDCB
A EDCB
A EDCB
A EDCB
A EDCB
A EDCB
A EDCB
A EDCB
A EDCB
A EDCB
A EDCB
A EDCB
A EDCB
A EDCB
A EDCB
A EDCB
A EDCB
A EDCB
A EDCB
A EDCB
A EDCB
A EDCB
A EDCB
A EDCB
A EDCB
A EDCB
A EDCB
A EDCB
A EDCB
A EDCB
A EDCB
A EDCB
A EDCB
A EDCB
A EDCB
A EDCB
A EDCB
A EDCB
A EDCB
A EDCB
A EDCB
A EDCB
A EDCB
A EDCB
A EDCB
A EDCB
.. .
.. .
.. .
.. .
.. .
.. .
.. .
Practice Test 2
Section 1: Writing-Essay
Time: 25 Minutes
1 Essay Question
You have 25 minutes to plan and write an essay on the topic below. DO NOT WRITE ON ANOTHER TOPIC. AN
ESSAY ON ANOTHER TOPIC WILL NOT BE SCORED.
The essay is intended to give you the chance to show your writing skills. Be sure to express your ideas on the topic
clearly and effectively. The quality of your writing is much more important than the quantity, but to cover the topic ade-
quately, you may want to write more than one paragraph. Be specific.
Your essay must be written on the two lined pages provided. You will not be given any additional paper. If you keep
your handwriting to a reasonable size, write on every line, and avoid wide margins, you should have enough space to
complete your essay.
Directions: Read the following paragraph and assignment carefully. Then prepare and write a persuasive essay. Be sure
to support your reasons with specific examples that will make your essay more effective.
"There is no compelling reason for 'live' television to be live. If all programs made use of the available five-
minute delay such as is now in use on some talk radio broadcasts, we could be sure that children would not be
exposed to profanity, lewdness, or extreme violence."
Assignment: What questions does this passage raise? Write an essay in which you evaluate this quotation. Give your
opinion about this matter and support your view with specific evidence.
THE PROCTOR WILL ANNOUNCE WHEN 25 MINUTES HA VE PASSED. AT THAT TIME, YOU MUST STOP
WRITING. IF YOU FINISH YOUR ESSAY BEFORE 25 MINUTES HA VE PASSED, YOU MAY NOT GO ON TO
ANY OTHER SECTION OF THE EXAM. THE PROCTOR WILL ANNOUNCE WHEN TO START THE NEXT
SECTION.
1. As they crossed the Atlantic, cheeses were
probably made in the galley by the colonists
on the Mayflower.
A. cheeses were probably made in the galley by
the colonists on the Mayflower.
B. probably cheeses were made in the galley by
the colonists of the Mayflower.
C. cheese was made, probably in the galley, by
the colonists on the Mayflower.
D. the colonists of the Mayflower probably
made cheeses in the galley.
E. in the galley of the Mayflower, the colonists
probably made cheese.
2. The series of articles is about the sicknesses of a
violent society, and also about how these ills can
be remedied.
A. and also about how these ills can be
remedied.
B. and as well about the ways of remedying
these ills.
C. and remedies for these ills.
D. and its remedy.
E. and about remedying these ills.
3. This year's alumni and alumnae differ from last
year's they support the funding campaign for the
A. last year's they support
B. last year's; they support
C. last year's, they support
D. last year's supporting
E. last year's in the support they give to
4. In addition to those of gasoline and sugar, the
higher grain prices which lead to more expensive
meat and poultry.
A. the higher grain prices which lead to more
expensive meat and poultry.
B. the higher prices of meat and poultry caused
by more expensive grain.
C. the higher prices in grain, meat and poultry.
D. higher grain prices leading to more
expensive meat and poultry.
E. the higher grain prices will lead to more
expensive meat and poultry.
Part II: Practice-Review-Analyze-Practice
Section 2: Writing-Multiple Choice
Time: 25 Minutes
34 Questions
In this section, choose the best answer for each question and blacken the corresponding space on the answer sheet.
Directions: The following questions test correctness and effective expression. In selecting the answer, pay attention to
grammar, diction, sentence structure, and punctuation. In the following questions, part or all of each sentence is under-
lined. The A answer repeats the underlined portion of the original sentence, while the next four offer alternatives.
Choose the answer that best expresses the meaning of the original sentence, and at the same time is grammatically
correct and stylistically superior. The correct choice should be clear, unambiguous, and concise.
EXAMPLE:
The forecaster predicted rain and the sky was clear.
A. rain and the sky was clear.
B. rain but the sky was clear.
C. rain the sky was clear.
D. rain, but the sky was clear.
E. rain being as the sky was clear.
The correct answer is D.
5. The workers remain in the fields until they are
exhausted; and this, in time, will seriously injure
their health.
A. exhausted; and this,
B. exhausted; it,
C. exhausted, which,
D. exhausted, a practice that,
E. exhausted, and it,
6. When you see, instead of read, a play, it
sometimes reveals new strengths or weaknesses.
A. it sometimes reveals new strengths or
weaknesses.
B. new strengths or weaknesses are sometimes
revealed to you.
C. you sometimes see new strengths or
weaknesses.
D. sometimes new strengths or weaknesses are
revealed.
E. new strengths or weaknesses can be seen
sometimes.
7. Carrying the warm water across the yard to melt
the ice on the bird bath, the sparrows were
gathered in groups a few feet away.
A. bird bath, the sparrows were gathered in
groups
B. bird bath, the sparrows gathered in groups
C. bird bath, the groups of sparrows gathered
D. bird bath, the groups of sparrow were
gathering
E. bird bath, I saw groups of sparrows gathered
Practice Test 2
Practice Test 2
GO ON TO THE NEXT PAGE
8. By paying very close attention to the shape of the
gem and looking carefully at the setting, you
can clearly see that the ring will not be an
antique. No Error.
9. If the election results are as Harris predicts, the
new senator will be the man which the people
believed made the better showing in the televised
debate. No Error.
10 . Not one of the sixty-five students
majoring in economics were prepared for the
teacher's asking about Marx on the examination.
No Error.
11. If the best-selling book always won the award,
the publishers who pay for the publicity would
withdraw their support, and there wouldn't be
no award at all. No Error.
12 . It must be she he had in mind when he spoke
of a well-trained athlete who has won a place
on the Olympic squad. No Error.
13 . The reasons for his looking so youngare
his low-fat diet, his daily exercise, and his
regularity to follow his doctor's recommendations.
No Error.
14 . I sincerely believe that a person
intelligent enough to be in business
by themselves should have the ability
to recognize a dangerous investment. No Error.
15 . The jury must first decide whether or not the
defendant was in New York, and then how he
can have had the strength to carry a 200-pound
body. No Error.
Part II: Practice-Review-Analyze-Practice
Directions: The following sentences may contain one error of grammar, usage, diction, or idiom. No sentence will
contain more than one error, and some have no error. If there is an error, it will be underlined with a letter. Sections of
the sentence that are not underlined cannot be changed. In selecting your answer, observe the requirements of standard
written English. If there is an error, choose the one underlined part that must be changed to correct the sentence. If there
is no error, choose E.
EXAMPLE:
The film tell the story of a cavalry captain and his wife who try to rebuild their lives after the Civil War.
No Error.
The correct answer is A.
AB C D
E
A
C
E
B
D
E
C D
E
B
C
D E
A
C
E
C
E
D
A
A
D
BB
D
A
C
BA
B
A
B
C
D E
A
B
CD
E
16 . The art of American morticians paints death
to look like life, sealed it away in watertight
caskets, and spirits it away to graveyards
camouflaged as gardens. No Error.
17. Many of the compounds that can
be produced from the leaves of this plant
are dangerous, but the plant themselves cannot
be called toxic. No Error.
18 . Most of the survivors now recovering neither
heard and saw anything unusual just before the
plane crashed. No Error.
19 . The Young Visitorsis an unusually powerful novel
about a group of cruel and idle young boys who
destruct an old man's home for no other reason
than that it is beautiful.No Error.
20. The state legislature has recommended a bill
that allows a married couple not to declare the
income of either the husband or the wife,
depending upon which income is more lower.
No Error.
21. It seems increasingly obvious that men's clothes
are designed not to please the men who will wear
them, but to impressthe people who will see them.
No Error.
22. Unlike Monet, Graham's oil paintings have
few bright colors, are small, and depict only
urban scenes. No Error.
23. When my broken arm was in a cast, neither the
nurse nor I were able to shave my face without
one or two cuts. No Error.
24. If I had my way, the driver would be charged for
criminal negligence and drunk driving,
and spend at least a year in jail. No Error.
25. There are at most colleges the requirement that
students take standardized tests to be used by
admissions committees to evaluate applicants
for entrance. No Error.
26. If westerners acknowledge that the eastern
United States has wilderness areas,
one probably thinks of the Blue Ridge
Mountains or perhaps Maine. No Error.
Practice Test 2
Practice Test 2
GO ON TO THE NEXT PAGE
A
BC
D
E
A
B
C D
E
A
BC
DE
A
B
C
DE
A
BC
D
E
A
B CD
E
A
BC D
E
A
B C
DE
A B
CD E
A
BC
D
E
A
B
C
DE
Questions 27-30 are based on the following passage.
The Majority Is Often Wrong
(1) I agree with the statement the majority is often
wrong. (2) The idea that the majority is always right has
been disproved by every bad or dishonest politician who
has been elected to any political office by the votes of the
majority. (3) It is disproved by every jury decision where
it turns out later that the prisoner they found guilty was
really innocent. (4) It is frequently disproved in high
school. (5) It is disproved in Germany when they elected
Hitler.
(6) In my school when I was a sophomore there was
an election of the student body president. (7) Two boys
(who I'll call Jack and Dave) and one girl (Jane) were
running for president. (8) Dave was bad student, and he
was popular and a good basketball player. (9) Jack was
active in a lot of clubs and in music, and Jane was by far
the best student of the three. (10) Dave won by a land-
slide, but never even finished his sophomore year when
he was in a drunk driving accident. (11) This shows how
wrong the majority can be.
(12) These examples show how the majority is often
wrong is true. (13) The old saying, the majority is always
right, is wrong.
27. Which of the following is the best version of
sentence 5 (reproduced below)?
It is disproved in Germany when they
elected Hitler.
A. Leave it as it is.
B. It is disproved by Germany where they
elected Hitler.
C. It is disproved when the Germans elected
Hitler.
D. Hitler disproves it in Germany.
E. It was disproved when the Germans elected
Hitler.
28. The first paragraph would be most improved by
the removal of which of the following sentences?
A. Sentence 1.
B. Sentence 2.
C. Sentence 3.
D. Sentence 4.
E. Sentence 5.
29. Which of the following does the first paragraph
make use of?
A. emphatic repetition of a phrase
B. rhetorical question
C. definition of a term
D. specific example of a personal experience
E. elaboration of an example
30. Which of the following is the best version of
sentence 6 (reproduced below)?
In my school when I was a sophomore
there was an election of the student
body president.
A. Leave it as it is.
B. When I was a sophomore, my school held an
election for student body president.
C. In my school, they held an election for
student body president when I was a
sophomore.
D. A student body president election was held
by my school when I was a sophomore.
E. When I was a sophomore, they held a student
body president election at my school.
Part II: Practice-Review-Analyze-Practice
Directions: The following passages are early drafts of student essays. Some parts of them need to be revised.
Read the selections carefully and answer the questions that follow. There will be questions about sentence structure,
diction, and usage in individual sentences or parts of sentences. Other questions will deal with the whole essay or
paragraphs, and ask you to decide about organization, development, and appropriate language. Choose the answer that
follows the requirements of standard written English, and most effectively expresses the intended meanings.
Questions 31-34 are based on the following passage.
Are Americans Getting Lazier?
(1) Too many people today are trying to get what they
want by using the least effort the fastest way. (2) Tech-
nology has helped this. (3) Calculators now give you the
solution to complex equations in seconds, even watches
have calculators on them. (4) People drive their cars to the
corner to drop off mail because they are too lazy to walk
even if it is healthy and possibly faster to just walk.
(5) Americans used to want a house in the suburbs, a
family, a job, and something to look forward to when the
kids were grown up. (6) Now they want quick money
without taking risks, get rich overnight, and live the life
of luxury. (7) They no longer plan ahead. (8) They think
about today. (9) They don't think about tomorrow at all.
(10) People are lazier than ever.
(11) They turn to television and radio for the news.
(12) They don't read newspapers. (13) They depend more
and more on automation doing things for you. (14) With
more things voice automated, Americans will no longer
need their remote controls. (15) Without some change,
our future may be a nightmare of sloth.
31. Which of the following is the best combined
version of sentences 1 and 2 (reproduced below)?
Too many people today are trying to get what
they want by using the least effort the fastest
way. Technology has helped this.
A. Leave it as it is.
B. Too many people today are trying to get what
they want by using the least effort the fastest
way, and technology is helping them.
C. With the help of technology, there are too
many people today who are trying to get
what they want by using the least effort the
fastest way.
D. Technology is helping too many people who
are trying to get what they want by using the
least effort in the fastest way.
E. Helped by technology, too many people
today are trying to get what they want in the
fastest way using the least effort.
32. Which of the following is the best version of
sentence 2 (reproduced below)?
Technology has helped this.
A. Leave it as it is.
B. This has been helped by technology.
C. Technology has helped this effort.
D. Technology is helping this to happen.
E. But technology has helped this.
33. Which of the following is the best version of
sentence 6 (reproduced below)?
Now they want quick money without taking
risks, get rich overnight, and live the life of
luxury.
A. Leave it as it is.
B. They now want quick money without taking
risks, riches overnight, and to live the life of
luxury.
C. Now they want to earn money quickly
without risk, to get rich overnight, and to live
a life of luxury.
D. They want quick money now, without taking
risks, and they want riches overnight and to
live a life of luxury.
E. What they want now is quick money, no
risks, riches overnight, and to live a life of
luxury.
34. To eliminate the series of very short sentences in
the second paragraph, which of the following is
the best way to combine sentences 7, 8, and 9
(reproduced below)?
They no longer plan ahead. They think about
today. They don't think about tomorrow at all.
A. They no longer plan ahead or think about
tomorrow; they think about today.
B. It is today, not tomorrow that they think
about; they never plan ahead.
C. They plan ahead no longer, thinking only of
today and not thinking about tomorrow at all.
D. No longer planning ahead, they think about
today, and not at all about tomorrow.
E. They no longer plan ahead, but think only of
today.
Practice Test 2
Practice Test 2
IF YOU FINISH BEFORE TIME IS CALLED, CHECK YOUR WORK ON THIS
SECTION ONLY . DO NOT WORK ON ANY OTHER SECTION IN THE TEST. STOP
complex fabric of our society.
A. differences . . . appreciate
B. truths . . . combat
C. traditions . . . resolve
D. similarities . . . enrich
E. fears . . . complete
2. What is most needed in a discussion of immigration
are solid facts, not wishful thinking; realities, not
A. explanations
B. reasons
C. ideas
D. fears
E. myths
3. South Korea's industrial production fell 6 percent
slipping deeper into recession.
A. figure . . . flourishing
B. decrease . . . steady
C. decline . . . sagging
D. change . . . lethargic
E. drop . . . booming
4. By gradually winning the support of both liberals
and conservatives, both rich and poor, the
governor has demonstrated that her remarkable
controversial issues.
A. interpersonal . . . equivocally
B. diplomatic . . . frankly
C. organizational . . . covertly
D. personal . . . deceptively
E. intimidating . . . obscurely
Part II: Practice-Review-Analyze-Practice
Section 3: Critical Reading
Time: 25 Minutes
28 Questions
In this section, choose the best answer for each question and blacken the corresponding space on the answer sheet.
Directions: Each blank in the following sentences indicates that something has been omitted. Consider the lettered
words beneath the sentence and choose the word or set of words that best fits the whole sentence.
EXAMPLE:
continent.
A. impoverished
B. successful
C. populous
D. developed
E. militant
The correct answer is C.
5. Slander and libel laws stand as a protection of an
dissemination of falsehoods.
A. unintentional
B. inevitable
C. inferential
D. irresponsible
E. incontestable
6. Presenting love as foolish, compromised, or
A. lyrical
B. antiromantic
C. conventional
D. melodic
E. sentimental
the clever ruse which contended that an animal
could add and subtract.
A. ostensibly . . . confirm
B. never . . . debunk
C. covertly . . . unmask
D. unwittingly . . . prove
E. potentially . . . defend
8. For an actor so changeable and unpredictable,
A. immutable
B. mercurial
C. stoical
D. placid
E. obstinate
general.
A. pessimist . . . ingrate
B. siren . . . tyrant
C. altruist . . . anarchist
D. cynic . . . misanthrope
E. philanthropist . . . misogynist
establishment, Dr. Sandstrom bravely continued
her work until other doctors could no longer deny
A. ignored . . . conviction
B. vilified . . . probability
C. encouraged . . . originality
D. supported . . . credibility
E. attacked . . . tenets
Practice Test 2
Practice Test 2
GO ON TO THE NEXT PAGE
Questions 11-12 are based on the following passage.
Though most slang expressions have short
lives-"groovy," for example-"cool" has lasted
for more than fifty years. The word was used, as it is
today, to describe large sums of money ("a cool mil-
lion") as long ago as 1730, while its common mod-
ern usage (in fashion) is believed to have been
coined by jazz musicians in the twentieth century.
The large number of definitions in almost any dic-
tionary makes it clear that "cool" is an example of
an "unspecified" word," while a word like "wrath-
ful" is highly determined. The more unspecified a
word is, the more chances it has of survival. Several
linguists argue that "cool" is still used because of its
connection to jazz, and they cite Miles Davis'Birth
of the Cool. On the other hand, it may simply be the
sound of the word-because it is so easy to say.
11. According to the passage, which of the following
words would be the best example of a "highly
determined" word?
A. conduct
B. influence
C. assassinate
D. flower
E. handle
12 . The passage suggests that the slang usage of the
word "cool" has remained in the language because
A. it has a large number of meanings
B. it cannot be used as a verb, noun, or adjective
C. jazz has increased in popularity since mid-
century
D. it is the opposite of warm
E. it has one syllable
Questions 13-14 are based on the following passage.
The poet Homer, about whom little is known,
can be seen as the parent of all Greek literature.
Later epic poets of Western literature viewed him as
the undisputed master. However, for his most suc-
cessful followers, curiously enough, his work was
as much a target as a model. The Roman poet
Virgil's Aeneid, for example, is a refutation of the
individualistic value system of the Homeric epic,
and the stanzas describing the battle in Heaven in
John Milton's Paradise Lost (1667), while Homeric
in style, are essentially comic. Cervantes' Don
Quixote (1605) and James Joyce's Ulysses (1921),
both of which owe much to Homer, lean towards
parody and mock epic. No serious author since
Homer has combined his unabashed heroic ethos
and erudition.
13 . In line 8, the "individualistic value system of the
Homeric epic" most likely refers to a belief in the
A. rules of Greek warfare
B. values of personal heroism
C. importance of epic combat
D. values of the Greek political system
E. principles of democracy
14 . The phrase "curiously enough" in line 5 serves to
A. emphasize Homer's superiority
B. present an unsolved puzzle
C. point to a paradox
D. introduce a critical point of view
E. mock the heroic ethos
Questions 15-20 are based on the following passage.
The following passage is from The Autobiography of
Benjamin Franklin.
In 1732 I first publish'd my Almanack, under
the name of Richard Saunders; it was continu'd by
me about twenty-five years, commonly call'd Poor
Richard's Almanack. I endeavor'd to make it both
entertaining and useful, and it accordingly came to
be in such demand, that I reap'd considerable profit
from it, vending annually near ten thousand. And
observing that it was generally read, scarce any
neighborhood in the province being without it, I
consider'd it as a proper vehicle for conveying in-
struction among the common people, who bought
scarcely any other books; I therefore filled all the
little spaces that occurr'd between the remarkable
days in the calendar with proverbial sentences,
chiefly such as inculcated industry and frugality, as
the means of procuring wealth, and thereby secur-
ing virtue; it being more difficult for a man in want,
to act always honestly, as, to use here one of those
proverbs, it is hard for an empty sack to stand
upright.
These proverbs, which contained the wisdom of
many ages and nations, I assembled and form'd into
Part II: Practice-Review-Analyze-Practice
Directions: Questions follow each of the passages below. Using only the stated or implied information in each passage
and in its introduction, if any, answer the questions.
a connected discourse prefix'd to the Almanack of
1757, as the harangue of a wise old man to the peo-
ple attending an auction. The bringing all these scat-
tered counsels thus into a focus enabled them to
make greater impression. The piece, being univer-
sally approved, was bought by the clergy and gentry,
to distribute gratis among their poor parishioners
and tenants. In Pennsylvania, as it discouraged use-
less expense in foreign superfluities, some thought it
had its share of influence in producing that growing
plenty of money which was observable for several
I considered my newspaper, also, as another
means of communicating instruction, and in that
view frequently reprinted in it extracts from the
Spectator, and other moral writers; and sometimes
publish'd little pieces of my own. Of these are a
Socratic dialogue, tending to prove that, whatever
might be his parts and abilities, a vicious man could
not properly be called a man of sense; and a dis-
course on self-denial, showing that virtue was not
secure till its practice became a habitude, and was
free from the opposition of contrary inclinations.
In the conduct of my newspaper, I carefully ex-
cluded all libelling and personal abuse. Whenever I
was solicited to insert any thing of that kind, and
the writers pleaded, as they generally did, the lib-
erty of the press, and that a newspaper was like a
stage-coach, in which any one who would pay had
a right to a place, my answer was, that I would print
the piece separately if desired, but that I would not
take upon me to spread his detraction; and that,
having contracted with my subscribers to furnish
them with what might be either useful or entertain-
ing, I could not fill their papers with private alterca-
tion, in which they had no concern, without doing
them manifest injustice.
15 . In line 17, the word "want" means
A. custom.
B. captivity.
C. covetousness.
D. desire.
E. need.
16 . According to the passage, the best way to become
virtuous is to first become
A. wealthy.
B. educated.
C. self-knowing.
D. reasonable.
E. self-serving.
17. With which of the following ideas about the
freedom of the press would Franklin be likely to
disagree?
I. A person who is willing to pay for printing
in a newspaper should be allowed to publish
whatever he or she chooses.
II. The primary obligation of the free press is to
its subscribers.
III. Personal disputes do not belong in the
public press.
A. I only
B. II only
C. III only
D. I and II only
E. I and III only
18 . Franklin's refusal to publish in his newspaper any
personal abuse was based on his belief that
A. the newspaper might be prosecuted for libel.
B. personal abuse should not be printed for any
price.
C. false personal attacks are too difficult to
distinguish from attacks that are based on fact.
D. a newspaper's responsibility is to furnish its
subscribers with worthy reading matter.
E. anyone who has paid for an item has the
right to have it printed.
19 . The passage suggests that Franklin's principal
profession was as a(n)
A. politician.
B. inventor.
C. printer.
D. scientist.
E. novelist.
20. According to the passage, in both his almanac and
newspaper, Franklin hoped to combine
A. profit and religion.
B. wisdom and appeal to a large public.
C. ideas of thrift and virtue.
D. instruction and entertainment.
E. comedy and tragedy.
Practice Test 2
Practice Test 2
GO ON TO THE NEXT PAGE
Questions 21-28 are based on the following passage.
Immediately after Hubble's launch, operators at
the National Aeronautics and Space Administration
Goddard Space Flight Center and at the Space
Telescope Science Institute began an extensive se-
ries of systems checks and calibrations. The first
test images revealed an inherent focusing problem,
technically known as spherical aberration. A close
examination of the images revealed that the tele-
scope's main mirror had been ground to the wrong
shape: it is two microns flatter at the edges than
stipulated by design (a micron is one millionth of a
meter). Small though the error may seem, it is a
gross mistake by the standards of modern precision
optics. The shape of the mirror makes it impossible
to focus all the light collected by Hubble to a single
point. Hubble's designers intended that the tele-
scope should be able to concentrate 70 percent of the
light of a point source-a distant star, for example-
into a spot 0.1 arcsecond across (an arcsecond is a
tiny angle, equal to 1/1,800 the apparent diameter
of the moon). Actually, only 15 percent of the light
falls into this central image; the other 85 percent
spills over into an unwanted halo several arcseconds
in diameter.
Various other difficulties have surfaced. Twice
each orbit, when Hubble passes in and out of the
earth's shadow, the sudden temperature change
causes the telescope's large solar cell panels to flap
up and down about 30 centimeters every 10 sec-
onds. The resulting jitter can disrupt the telescope's
pointing system and cause additional blurring of
astronomical images. Two of Hubble's six gyro-
scopes have failed, and a third works only intermit-
tently; the telescope needs at least three gyroscopes
to perform its normal science operations. Faulty
electrical contacts threatened to shut down the
High-Resolution Spectrograph.
NASA hopes to address some of these problems
in 1994, when astronauts are scheduled to visit
Hubble. They will attempt to replace the tele-
scope's solar panels and two of the gyroscopes.
The astronauts may also try to install a package of
corrective optics and an upgraded Wide Field and
Planetary Camera if the new devices are completed
by then.
In the meantime, scientists have quickly learned
how to wring as much performance from the space
telescope as possible. Because Hubble's mirror was
ground to fine precision and because its error is
well understood, computer enhancement can
restore many images to their intended sharpness.
The resulting astronomical views have eloquently
refuted some early pessimism about the telescope's
scientific capabilities. Regrettably, attaining such
resolution often involves discarding the smeared
halos that appear around celestial targets, literally
throwing away most of the light captured by
Hubble.
The greatest blow to Hubble's scientific mission
therefore has been not a loss of resolution but a loss
of sensitivity. Hubble was designed to be able to
detect objects a billion times fainter than those vis-
ible to the human eye. At present, the telescope is
limited to observing objects roughly 20 times
brighter than intended. Hubble cannot detect some
particularly elusive targets, such as extremely dis-
tant galaxies and quasars or possible planets
around nearby stars. Astronomers have had to post-
pone many of their potentially most significant ob-
servations until the telescope is fixed.
Although designed to home in on some of the
most remote cosmic objects, Hubble has proved
well suited to studying objects within the solar sys-
tem. For example, it has captured stunning views of
the giant planets, Jupiter and Saturn. NASA's two
V oyager space probes closely scrutinized Jupiter in
1979 and Saturn in 1980 and 1981. The space tele-
scope can routinely produce images of Jupiter and
Saturn comparable in detail to those obtained by
the V oyagers only a few days before their closest
approaches to the two planets.
21. In line 6, the word "inherent" means
A. correctable, insignificant.
B. theoretical, hypothetical.
C. serious, grave.
D. innate, basic.
E. suppressing, holding back.
22. How much greater a percentage of the light of a
point source would have been concentrated into
an arcsecond spot if the mirror of the Hubble
telescope had been ground correctly?
A. 15 percent
B. 30 percent
C. 55 percent
D. 70 percent
E. 80 percent
Part II: Practice-Review-Analyze-Practice
23. It can be inferred from the third paragraph that the
telescope is subjected to sharp temperature changes
because the temperature is
A. affected by its proximity to the moon.
B. affected by the presence of the earth's
shadow.
C. affected by the proximity of other planets to
the earth.
D. affected by the earth's atmosphere.
E. much higher as the telescope moves away
from the sun.
24. According to the passage, all of the following have
been troubled or defective EXCEPT
A. solar cell panels.
B. gyroscopes.
C. main mirror.
D. High-Resolution Spectrograph.
E. lens.
25. The word "address" as used in line 38 means
A. write to.
B. use a proper form.
C. apply itself.
D. take a stand.
E. repair.
26. Which of the following best describes the
difference between a telescope's sensitivity and
its resolution?
A. Sensitivity is response to light or sound
waves; resolution is its ability to separate an
image into parts.
B. Sensitivity is the condition of receiving
accurately outside stimuli; resolution is the
capability of making darker shades lighter.
C. Sensitivity is its ability to perceive light;
resolution is its ability to make the parts of
an image visible.
D. Sensitivity is the distance at which a
telescope can pick up foreign objects;
resolution is the image of these objects.
E. Sensitivity is what is always lost in an image
when resolution is gained.
27. The last paragraph of the passage provides
A. a summary of the arguments of the whole
passage.
B. an irrelevant comparison of the Hubble
telescope and the V oyager probes.
C. a personal anecdote of the author.
D. a contradiction of the assertions of the third
paragraph (lines 38-45) of the passage.
E. a rebuttal of media claims that the Hubble
telescope is a failure.
28. The purpose of the passage as a whole is to
A. assess the accomplishments and
shortcomings of the Hubble telescope.
B. compare the successes of the Hubble
telescope with those of other space
telescopes.
C. explain why the media disappointment with
the Hubble telescope is unjustified.
D. remind readers of what the Hubble telescope
may accomplish after repairs are made.
E. explain why the loss of sensitivity in the
Hubble telescope is compensated by a gain
in resolution.
Practice Test 2
Practice Test 2
IF YOU FINISH BEFORE TIME IS CALLED, CHECK YOUR WORK ON THIS
SECTION ONLY . DO NOT WORK ON ANY OTHER SECTION IN THE TEST. STOP
Part II: Practice-Review-Analyze-Practice
Section 4: Mathematics
Time: 25 Minutes
20 Questions
Directions: Solve each problem in this section by using the information given and your own mathematical calcula-
tions, insights, and problem-solving skills. Then select the one correct answer of the five choices given and mark the
corresponding circle on your answer sheet. Use the available space on the page for your scratch work.
Notes
1. All numbers used are real numbers.
2. Calculators may be used.
3. Some problems may be accompanied by figures or diagrams. These figures are drawn as accurately as possible
EXCEPT when it is stated in a specific problem that a figure is not drawn to scale. The figures and diagrams are
meant to provide information useful in solving the problem or problems. Unless otherwise stated, all figures and
diagrams lie in a plane.
Data That Can Be Used for Reference
rectangle
A = lw
Area
triangle
circle
rectangular solid
V = lwh
Volume
right circular cylinder
Pythagorean Relationship
Special T riangles
A circle is composed of 360°
A straight angle measures 180°
The sum of the angles of a triangle is 180°
w
l
h
b
r
M
r
h
l
h
w
a2 + b2 = c 2
C B
A
c
a
b
x
x
1. A man purchased 4 pounds of steak priced at $3.89
per pound. How much change did he receive from
a $20 bill?
2. If a number is divisible by 7 but is not divisible by
21, then the number cannot be divisible by
A. 2
B. 3
C. 5
D. 8
3. If .0039y = 39, then y =
4. In /H17005XYZ, XY = 10, YZ = 10, and ∠ a = 84°. What
is the degree measure of ∠ Z?
X
a
Y
Z
Practice Test 2
Practice Test 2
GO ON TO THE NEXT PAGE
5. If ab= and b = 81, what is the value of a?
A. 3
B. 3
C. 9
6. Above are the measures of rainfall for five
consecutive days during the winter. For the
measure of those five days, which of the following
is true?
I. The median equals the mode.
II. The median equals the arithmetic mean.
III. The range equals the median.
A. I only
B. II only
C. III only
D. I and II only
E. I and III only
7. Three-fifths of a geometry class is made up of
female students. What is the ratio of male students
to female students?
A. 5
B. 5
C. 3
D. 3
E. 2
8. What is the slope of the line for the equation
6x + y = 3?
A. 6
B. 3
C. -2
D. -6
E. -9
Part II: Practice-Review-Analyze-Practice
9. In the figure above, all line segments meet at right
angles, and each segment has a length of x. What
is the area of the figure in terms of x?
10 . If x - y = 15 and 3x + y = 13, then y =
A. -8
B. -7
C. 7
D. 8
11. WX and WZ are angle bisectors of the base angles
of isosceles triangle XYZ above. If Y = 80°, what is
the degree measure of ∠ XWZ?
12 . If m2 + n2 = 12 and mn = 9, then (m + n)2 =
X
Y
W
Z
x
x
Practice Test 2
Practice Test 2
GO ON TO THE NEXT PAGE
13 . If x, y, and z are consecutive positive integers
greater than 1, not necessarily in that order, which
of the following is (are) true?
I. x > z
II. x + y > z
III. yz < xz
IV . xy < y + z
A. I only
B. II only
C. II and III only
D. II and IV only
E. III and IV only
14 . The area of a square is 72 square feet. What is the
length of a diagonal of the square?
A. 36 feet
B. 18 2 feet
C. 12 feet
D. 6 2 feet
E. 6 feet
15 . In a triangle, the ratio of two angles is 5:2, and the
third angle is equal to the difference between the
other two. What is the number of degrees in the
smallest angle?
E. 9
16 . If (a, b) 5 (c, d) = (ac - bd, ad), then
(-2, 3) 5 (4, -1) =
A. (-5, 2)
B. (-5, -2)
C. (-11, 2)
D. (-11, -2)
E. (-5, -3)
Part II: Practice-Review-Analyze-Practice
17. A collection of 25 coins consists of nickels, dimes,
and quarters. There are three times as many dimes
as nickels and three more dimes than quarters.
What is the total value of the collection in dollars
and cents?
18 . On the circle above with center O, arc YWX equals
100°. Which of the following is the degree
19 . If m and n are integers and mn 10= , which of
the following CANNOT be a value of m + n?
20. What are the y-intercepts for the hyperbola
A. ,05 2!`j
B. ,01 0!`j
C. ,05!`j
D. ,02 5!^h
Y
W
Z
X
O
Practice Test 2
Practice Test 2
IF YOU FINISH BEFORE TIME IS CALLED, CHECK YOUR WORK ON THIS
SECTION ONLY . DO NOT WORK ON ANY OTHER SECTION IN THE TEST. STOP
mistakes we made last week or last year.
A. hindsight
B. prophecy
C. insight
D. tactfulness
E. nostalgia
2. The pamphlet argues that imagination is not a gift
possesses.
A. relevant
B. inimical
C. unique
D. unrestricted
E. conducive
all of the governor's conservation program is based.
A. hope
B. question
C. enigma
D. image
E. paradox
as if he had not heard them.
A. fight . . . avocations
B. compromise . . . overtures
C. confrontation . . . accusations
D. condemnation . . . motives
E. consensus . . . implications
Part II: Practice-Review-Analyze-Practice
Section 5: Critical Reading
Time: 25 Minutes
28 Questions
In this section, choose the best answer for each question and blacken the corresponding space on the answer sheet.
Directions: Each blank in the following sentences indicates that something has been omitted. Consider the lettered
words beneath the sentence and choose the word or set of words that best fits the whole sentence.
EXAMPLE:
continent.
A. impoverished
B. successful
C. populous
D. developed
E. militant
The correct answer is C.
5. Again and again, out of indifference or sheer
assuming that there was no end to the earth's
A. invested . . . resolve
B. expanded . . . ability
C. wasted . . . failure
D. husbanded . . . inability
E. squandered . . . capacity
spending on political candidates by large
corporations, most business contributions are
A. lurid . . . equitably
B. shocking . . . unfairly
C. unfair . . . secretly
D. favorable . . . evenly
E. encouraging . . . carefully
7. With characteristic understatement, Webster called
his client's embezzlement of 4 million dollars a
A. peccadillo
B. crime
C. atrocity
D. theft
E. enormity
8. Keynes's theory that unemployment is caused by
that have no savings at all.
A. simple . . . wealthy
B. bizarre . . . prosperous
C. orderly . . . rich
D. individualistic . . . successful
E. excessive . . . indigent
refusal to read about any position different from
his own.
A. parochialism . . . reluctance
B. insularity . . . readiness
C. bigotry . . . zeal
D. narrow-mindedness . . . eagerness
E. magnanimity . . . failure
Practice Test 2
Practice Test 2
GO ON TO THE NEXT PAGE
Questions 10-11 are based on the following passage.
In the early 1800s, a group of English workers
known as the Luddites protested the effects of the
Industrial Revolution on their jobs. They claimed
as their leader Ned Ludd, also known as "King
Ludd," who supposedly destroyed two large ma-
chines that produced inexpensive stockings, under-
cutting the stockings produced by skilled knitters.
The Luddite movement grew in England to the
point where many wool and cotton mills were
destroyed. In response, the British government
harshly suppressed Luddites, making "machine
breaking" a capital crime and executing 17 men in
1813. In today's world, the term Luddite is used to
describe anyone who opposes the advance of in-
dustrial technology, although according to some
historians, this unfairly characterizes the original
movement.
10 . The paragraph suggests that
A. many people are as opposed to workers'
protests today as they were in the 19th
century.
B. advances in technology have caused
widespread destruction throughout history.
C. today's understanding of the Luddite
movement may be oversimplified.
D. the British government unfairly executed
people for speaking out against industrial
changes.
E. people don't appreciate craftsmanship and
much as they do low prices.
11. From details in the paragraph, which of the
following statements is accurate?
A. The Luddite movement grew in the textile
industry.
B. Both men and women participated in the
Luddite movement.
C. Luddites believed in a socialistic society.
D. The protests conducted by the Luddites
didn't affect production.
E. Most British citizens supported the
government against the Luddites.
Questions 12-13 are based on the following passage.
The neutrino, a subatomic particle named by
physicist Enrico Fermi in 1931, was actually first
hypothesized by Wofgang Pauli. In the physical
universe, what goes in always equals what comes
out, in one form or another. But when radioactive
atoms spat out electrons and changed into other
kinds of atoms, some energy appeared to be miss-
ing, which led Pauli to propose that the energy was
carried away by a virtually invisible particle. He
was almost embarrassed by his theory: "I have
done a terrible thing. I have postulated a particle
that cannot be detected." And when Fermi submit-
ted a paper on the possibility of such a particle, it
was rejected as "remote from reality." The first for-
mal experiment to hunt for neutrinos was in 1956,
when physicists Clyde Cowan and Fred Reines
found a definite trace of the particles in the intense
wash of radiation emitted from newly commissioned
nuclear reactors.
12 . According to the paragraph, Pauli thought that
neutrinos might explain
A. intense radiation.
B. missing energy.
C. formation of electrons.
D. mysterious events in the universe.
E. loss of radiation.
13 . Of the following statements, which is best
supported by the paragraph?
A. The scientific community resists new
theories.
B. Scientists are competitive and are not
comfortable sharing their hypotheses.
C. Neither Pauli nor Fermi made an attempt to
find a neutrino.
D. Scientists are mistrustful of explanations that
rely on "invisible" elements.
E. Nuclear reactors were made possible by the
discovery of neutrinos.
Part II: Practice-Review-Analyze-Practice
Directions: Questions follow the passage below. Using only the stated or implied information in the passage and in its
introduction, if any, answer the questions.
Questions 14-16 are based on the following pair of
passages.
Passage 1
Urban renewal was supposed to revitalize cities
by redeveloping slums and blighted commercial
areas. But it failed because of the introduction of
eminent domain into the land development process.
Normally, buildings are demolished only when
developers have acquired the properties, and only
after they know demand exists for more profitable
developments in their place. Market forces ensure
that there are few properties which end up vacant
for long. But because of urban renewal, govern-
ments used eminent domain to condemn too much
property, whether demand existed or not. As so
often happens, government interference created a
major problem. In many cities, it left undeveloped,
"unrenewed" vacant lots, which are not only eye-
sores but also hangouts for criminal elements.
Passage 2
Urban renewal is an opportunity to develop bet-
ter communities. In its original form, many pro-
jects failed-for a number of reasons-and many
city planners and civic leaders judged the idea a
failure. But the concept now focuses not on the
destruction of vibrant (if run-down) communities
but more on renovation, selective demolition, com-
mercial development and tax incentives. It is still
not without its critics or its problems. For example,
when areas are "gentrified," poorer residents can be
"priced out" and forced to move into even more
depressed areas of cities. But the concept of urban
renewal continues to evolve as successes and fail-
ures are examined. Encouraging more community
involvement in development projects is a sure way
to increase the successes.
14 . The author of Passage 1 would most likely favor
which of the following?
A. more prosecutions of slum landlords
B. increased government funding in depressed
areas
C. less involvement of the government in
development projects
D. fewer restrictions on private developers
E. more traffic control and public parking lots
in depressed downtown areas.
15 . In Passage 2, line 26, the word "gentrified" most
nearly means
A. patrolled by special police units.
B. redeveloped for middle- and upper-class
residents.
C. taken over by the federal government and
demolished.
D. "spruced up" superficially.
E. turned into housing for the poor.
16 . On which one of the following points would the
authors of Passage 1 and Passage 2 be most likely
to agree?
A. Government involvement is the major cause
of the failure of urban renewal.
B. Urban renewal has been good for the middle
class but not for the poor.
C. Most urban renewal projects have failed.
D. Demolition and rebuilding should be done
selectively.
E. Tax incentives shouldn't be used to
encourage urban renewal.
Questions 17-28 are based on the following passage.
Playfully, we call them "shrinks," acknowledging
each time we do so that the psychiatrist's precursor
was the head-shrinking witchdoctor, the original
healer of souls. Often we use the name sardonically,
implying that a certain residue of mumbo-jumbo
still clings to our supposedly enlightened science of
the mind. But by the same token might there not
be something of at least marginal value to be found
in the supposedly superstitious practice of witch-
doctoring? Have traditional cultures anything to
teach our industrial society about the meaning of
sanity? The anthropologist Marshall Sahlins, assem-
bling a composite picture of life among the hunters
and gatherers, once undertook to reconstruct a
"stone-age economics" from which he believed we
might learn something about the meaning of wealth
and poverty. Is there a "stone-age psychiatry" that
can be mined for similarly heuristic insights?
Until well into this century, even trained anthro-
pological observers tended to regard tribal healers
as charlatans whose practices were mere quackery.
Some scholars classified all shamans as psychotics
whose practices were "witchcraft" in the most pejo-
rative meaning of the word. The terms used ranged
from the politely technical ("neurotic-epileptoid
Practice Test 2
Practice Test 2
GO ON TO THE NEXT PAGE
type") to the bluntly dismissive ("veritable idiots"),
but all came down to regarding tribal therapy as the
mad treating the mad. Thanks largely to the work of
Claude Levi-Strauss and subsequent studies in tran-
scultural psychiatry, we have since come to see that
tribal societies possess spiritual and psychothera-
peutic traditions that may be more effective in the
treatment of their own people than Western medi-
cine, especially when it comes to mental and emo-
tional disorders. The anthropologist I. M. Lewis,
standing the question on its head, has gone so far as
to suggest that our psychotherapy might be viewed
as a scaled-down subspecies of traditional healing.
"The more meaningful equivalence," he observes,
"is that psychiatry, and especially psychoanalysis,
as Jung would perhaps have admitted much more
freely than most Freudians would care to, represent
limited and imperfect forms of shamanism." The
remark is not entirely fair to Freud, who readily
acknowledged that tribal healers can be as adept as
many psychiatrists at creating a "condition of ex-
pectant faith" that can have great therapeutic effect.
Perhaps the most marked difference between
psychotherapy old and new is the complexity and
breadth of traditional healing. In tribal societies,
the distinction between the physical and psychic is
far less rigid than we understand it to be. One
might almost say that traditional medicine regards
all disease as psychosomatic, in the sense that the
psyche is implicated in its etiology. Even a frozen
foot may be treated by Eskimo shamans as a psy-
chic disturbance.
Therefore, thoughts, dreams, memories, emo-
tions must be mobilized in its cure. The province of
stone-age psychiatry is a broad one.
E. Fuller Torrey, taking issue with the "psychi-
atric imperialism" of Western society, points out
that healing has everything to do with the cultural
bond that unites therapist and client. A common
worldview, a shared diagnostic vocabulary, mutu-
ally respected ideas and principles make for the
trust and conviction without which healing may be
impossible. But if we have learned that tribal tech-
niques can be more effective than modern psychia-
try in treating native people, this knowledge may
have little direct value for us-unless we can find
some common ground with tribal peoples that al-
lows us to borrow a portion of their culture. That
common ground may be the ground of desperation.
If our relations with nature are as deeply failed as
the environmental crisis suggests, we may have to
look for help wherever we can find it, including in-
sights long absent from our own society. Where
else are these to be found but in the experience of
our fellow humans living different lives in a differ-
ent world?
Traditional therapy can be stubbornly parochial;
it is embedded in a place and a history, in the
rhythms of climate, in the contours of a landscape
where the birds and beasts have been close com-
panions for centuries. In local lore, a river, a moun-
tain, a grove may take on the personality of a tribal
elder, a presence named and known over the gener-
ations. Artifacts assume a peculiarly evocative
power. The manangs of Borneo come to their pa-
tients bearing a bundle filled with strange imple-
ments: the horns of the giant beetle, a quartz amulet
that is "the stone of light," a wild boar's tusk that
can retrieve lost souls. What can these things mean
to us? They seem like the proverbial "eye of newt
and toe of frog" that make witchcraft appear so
ludicrous. Yet the effectiveness of the shaman's
method largely lies in its emotional specificity.
What we as modern observers achieve by our efforts
to universalize is, at last, something of our own, a
new creation that may lack the color and force of
the original.
17. In the first paragraph, the author uses the word
"shrinks" (line 1) in order to
I. jokingly refer to the forerunners of the
contemporary psychiatrist.
II. suggest a distrust of contemporary
psychiatry.
III. remind readers of the potential value in the
traditional practices.
A. I only
B. I and II only
C. I and III only
D. II and III only
E. I, II, and III
18 . The first paragraph cites the work of anthropologist
Marshall Sahlins in order to suggest that
A. if the stone age can teach us about economics,
perhaps it can teach us about psychiatry.
B. the problems of poverty in our era can be
solved by consulting stone-age economics.
C. the stone-age notions of rich and poor are
irrelevant in today's complex civilization.
D. modern anthropologists need not limit their
studies to the lifestyles of lost civilizations.
E. modern psychiatry is dependent on ancient
ideas.
Part II: Practice-Review-Analyze-Practice
19 . The passage argues that tribal medical treatment
may be
A. more universally effective than modern
methods.
B. more effective in treating people living in
civilized countries than modern methods.
C. about as effective as Western methods in
treating members of tribal societies.
D. more effective than Western methods in
treating mental disorders of tribal members.
E. more effective than Western methods in
treating mental disorders of non-Western
nations.
20. The passage implies that one reason for the
success within a tribe of tribal medicine is that
A. some tribal doctors may use curative herbs.
B. the patient expects to be cured.
C. some tribal doctors have Western training.
D. the patients are not really sick.
E. some tribal doctors refuse to use amulets.
21. Which of the following would be likely to be
treated by ancient psychotherapy but not by
modern?
A. Depression
B. Broken arm
C. Fear of crowds
D. Schizophrenia
E. Mental illness
22. The word "marked" in line 48 means
A. signaled.
B. indicated.
C. scored.
D. conspicuous.
E. recorded.
23. Which of the following best expresses the
meaning of the phrase "between the physical and
psychic" in line 51?
A. Between body and mind
B. Between the sensual and sensuous
C. Between the real and supernatural
D. Between logic and the uncanny
E. Between sensory and extrasensory
perception
24. In line 54, the word "psychosomatic" can be best
defined as
A. curable by herbal medicine or spells.
B. contagious.
C. originating in the mind.
D. imaginary.
E. subject to treatment by witchcraft.
25. Freud and E. Fuller Torrey agree on the
importance in
A. mutual trust between doctor and patient.
B. a conviction of the superiority of shamanism
to psychiatry.
C. the patient's desire to be cured.
D. a conviction of the superiority of psychiatry
to shamanism.
E. a genuine belief in the efficacy of witchcraft.
26. In line 61, the phrase "taking issue with" can be
best defined as
A. departing from.
B. resulting from.
C. disagreeing with.
D. proceeding with.
E. siding with.
27. Anticipating the skepticism that might arise from
taking ancient medicine seriously, the author has
deliberately used all the following words and
phrases to mock ancient medicine or its
practitioners EXCEPT
A. "mumbo-jumbo" (line 5).
B. "charlatans" (line 21).
C. "psychotics" (line 22).
D. "eye of newt and toe of frog" (lines 95-96).
E. "shaman's method" (lines 97-98).
28. The purpose of the passage as a whole is to
A. question the usefulness of modern psycho-
therapy as opposed to tribal healing methods.
B. assert the superiority of tribal methods to
Western psychiatric procedures.
C. urge the study of tribal medicine and tribal
ways to abet Western psychiatry.
D. criticize Western civilization's arrogant
dismissal of tribal lore.
E. reconstruct as far as it is possible some
principles of stone-age mental therapy.
Practice Test 2
Practice Test 2
IF YOU FINISH BEFORE TIME IS CALLED, CHECK YOUR WORK ON THIS
SECTION ONLY . DO NOT WORK ON ANY OTHER SECTION IN THE TEST. STOP
Part II: Practice-Review-Analyze-Practice
Section 6: Mathematics
Time: 25 Minutes
20 Questions
Directions: This section is composed of two types of questions. Use the 25 minutes allotted to answer both question
types. For questions 1-10, select the one correct answer of the five choices given and mark the corresponding circle on
your answer sheet. Your scratch work should be done on any available space in the section.
Notes
1. All numbers used are real numbers.
2. Calculators can be used.
3. Some problems may be accompanied by figures or diagrams. These figures are drawn as accurately as possible
EXCEPT when it is stated in a specific problem that a figure is not drawn to scale. The figures and diagrams are
meant to provide information useful in solving the problem or problems. Unless otherwise stated, all figures and
diagrams lie in a plane.
Data That Can Be Used for Reference
rectangle
A = lw
Area
triangle
circle
rectangular solid
V = lwh
Volume
right circular cylinder
Pythagorean Relationship
Special T riangles
A circle is composed of 360°
A straight angle measures 180°
The sum of the angles of a triangle is 180°
w
l
h
b
r
M
r
h
l
h
w
a2 + b2 = c 2
C B
A
c
a
b
x
x
1. What is the value of (3 + 5)2?
A. 8
B. 9
2. In the arithmetic sequence 4, 8, 12, 16, 20, . . . ,
which of the following could not be a term in the
sequence?
3. If y + 2 is a positive integer, then y must be
A. even
B. odd
C. greater than -2
D. less than 2
E. positive
4. A plumber charges $45 for the first hour of work
and $20 per hour for each additional hour of work
after the first. What would be the total bill for
labor if the plumber works for 6 consecutive
hours?
A. $6 5
Practice Test 2
Practice Test 2
GO ON TO THE NEXT PAGE
5. What is the perimeter, in meters, of the figure
above?
E. Cannot be determined from the given
information
6. If a = p + prt, then r =
A. t
a 1-
B. pt
ap-
C. app t--
D. t
a
E. pt
ap+
7. Rajiv will be y years old x years from now. How
old will he be z years from now?
A. y - x + z
B. y + x + z
C. y + x - z
D. y - x - z
E. x + z - y
8. Which of the following is equivalent to z 2
A. z
B. z5
C. z
D. z
E. z5
Part II: Practice-Review-Analyze-Practice
9. The average of three numbers is 55. The second
is 1 more than twice the first, and the third is
4 less than three times the first. What is the largest
number?
10 . In the figure above, the area of ABC 63=O .
What is the value of x?
A. 2
C. 4
E. 6
AD x B
C
Practice Test 2
Practice Test 2
GO ON TO THE NEXT PAGE
Directions for Student-Produced Response Questions (Grid-ins): Questions 11-20 require you to solve the
problem and enter your answer by carefully marking the circles on the special grid. Examples of the appropriate way
to mark the grid follow.
Answer: 3.7 Answer: 2
Answer: 1 2
Do not grid in mixed numbers in the form of mixed numbers. Always change mixed numbers to improper fractions or
decimals.
Change to 1.5 or Change to 2
.. .
.. .
.. .
Fraction bar
.. .
Decimal point
Part II: Practice-Review-Analyze-Practice
Answer: 123
Space permitting, answers can start in any column. Each grid-in answer that follows is correct.
Note: Circles must be filled in correctly to receive credit. Mark only one circle in each column. No credit will be given
if more than one circle in a column is marked. Example:
Answer: 258 (no credit)
.. .
.. .
.. .
Practice Test 2
Practice Test 2
GO ON TO THE NEXT PAGE
Answer: 9
Accuracy of decimals: Always enter the most accurate decimal value that the grid will accommodate. For example: An
answer such as .8888 . . . can be gridded as .888 or .889. Gridding this value as .8, .88, or .89 is considered inaccurate
and therefore not acceptable. The acceptable grid-ins of 9
are:
Be sure to write your answers in the boxes at the top of the circles before doing your gridding. Although writing out the
answers above the columns is not required, it is very important to ensure accuracy. Even though some problems may
have more than one correct answer, grid only one answer. Grid-in questions contain no negative answers.
.. .
.. .
.. .
Part II: Practice-Review-Analyze-Practice
11. If xx 5
3 1+= , then x =
12 . In a class of 35 students, 60% are girls. How many
boys are in the class?
13 . What is the average of 4
1 , and 12
14 . If a car averages 317.9 miles on 17 gallons of gas,
how many miles will it travel on 5 gallons of gas?
Springfield High School's average SAT scores over a
five-year period were
Math Verbal
15 . What was the mean (average) of the verbal SAT
scores for the five-year period 1989 through 1993?
16 . The ratio of the measures of the angles of a
quadrilateral is 3:5:7:9. What is the degree
measure of the smallest angle?
17. If Jim takes 6 days to paint a house alone and
Mike takes 8 days to paint the same house alone,
what part of the job will be completed if both boys
work for 2 days?
18 . In square ABCD in the figure above, AB = 5. What
is the area of square BDMN?
A
CD
M
N
B
Practice Test 2
Practice Test 2
GO ON TO THE NEXT PAGE
19 . In the graph above, if each point aligns exactly with
a grid mark or aligns halfway between two grid
marks, what was the greatest percentage increase
between two consecutive years? (Disregard the %
sign when you are gridding your answer.)
20. What is the measure in degrees of arc MQN in the
circle above with center P?
M
Q
P
N
Car Sales
Sales In Thousands
Part II: Practice-Review-Analyze-Practice
IF YOU FINISH BEFORE TIME IS CALLED, CHECK YOUR WORK ON THIS
SECTION ONLY . DO NOT WORK ON ANY OTHER SECTION IN THE TEST. STOP
Questions 1-14 are based on the following passages.
The two passages that follow are about the conductor of
the modern symphony orchestra. The first was written in
the 1950s by a well-known composer-conductor. The sec-
ond was written in the 1960s by a well-known composer.
Passage 1
There was an era of the so-called violin-conduc-
tor, whose main duty was to start and stop the
orchestra and generally keep the flow of the music
going. This was all well and good as long as orches-
tras were small enough. But around Beethoven's
time, orchestras began getting larger and larger, and
it soon became apparent that somebody had to be up
there to keep the players together. So conducting as
we know it is actually less than 150 years old.
The first real conductor in our sense of the word
was Mendelssohn, who founded a tradition of con-
ducting based on the concept of precision, as sym-
bolized in the wooden stick we call the baton.
Mendelssohn dedicated himself to an exact realiza-
tion of the score he was conducting, through manip-
ulation of that baton. There soon arrived, however, a
great dissenter named Richard Wagner who declared
that everything Mendelssohn was doing was wrong
and that any conductor worth his salt should person-
alize the score he was conducting by coloring it with
his own emotions and his own creative impulse. And
so out of the clash of these two points of view the
history of conducting was born; and there arose all
those great names in conducting, as well as all the
fights that go on about them right up to our own
time. Mendelssohn fathered the "elegant" school,
whereas Wagner inspired the "passionate" school of
conducting. Actually, both attitudes are necessary,
the Apollonian and the Dionysian, and neither one is
completely satisfactory without the other. Both of
them can be badly abused, as we know from having
heard performances that seemed clear but were dry
as dust, and others in which passion became simple
distortion.
The ideal modern conductor is a synthesis of the
two attitudes, and this synthesis is rarely achieved.
In fact, it's practically impossible. Almost any mu-
sician can be a conductor, even a pretty good one;
but only a rare musician can be a great one. This is
not only because it is so hard to achieve the
Mendelssohn-Wagner combination, but also be-
cause the conductor's work encompasses such a
tremendous range. Unlike an instrumentalist or a
singer, he has to play on an orchestra. His instru-
ment is one hundred human instruments, each one a
thorough musician, each with a will of his own; and
he must cause them to play like one instrument with
a single will. Therefore, he must have enormous au-
thority, to say nothing of psychological insight in
dealing with this large group and all this is just the
beginning. He must be a master of the mechanics of
conducting. He must have an inconceivable amount
of knowledge. He must have a profound perception
of the inner meanings of music, and he must have
uncanny powers of communication. If he has all
this, he is the ideal conductor.
Passage 2
Conducting, like politics, rarely attracts original
minds, and the field is more for the making of ca-
reers and the exploitation of personalities-another
resemblance to politics-than a profession for the
application of exact and standardized disciplines. A
conductor may actually be less well equipped for
his work than his players, but no one except the
players need know it, and his career is not depen-
dent on them in any case, but on the society women
(including critics) to whom his musical qualities
are of secondary importance. The successful con-
ductor can be an incomplete musician, but he must
be a complete angler. His first skill has to be power
politics.
In such people the incidence of ego disease is
naturally high to begin with, and I hardly need add
that the disease grows like a tropical weed under the
Practice Test 2
Practice Test 2
GO ON TO THE NEXT PAGE
Section 7: Critical Reading
Time: 20 Minutes
14 Questions
In this section, choose the best answer for each question and blacken the corresponding space on the answer sheet.
Directions: Questions follow the two passages below. Using only the stated or implied information in each passage
and in its introduction, if any, answer the questions.
sun of a pandering public. The results are that the
conductor is encouraged to impose a purely egotis-
tical, false, and arbitrary authority, and that he is
accorded a position out of all proportion to his
real value in the musical, as opposed to the music-
business, community. He soon becomes a "great"
conductor, in fact, or as the press agent of one of
them recently wrote me, a "titan of the podium,"
and as such is very nearly the worst obstacle to
genuine music-making. "Great" conductors, like
"great" actors, are unable to play anything but
themselves; being unable to adapt themselves to
the work, they adapt the work to themselves, to
their "style," their mannerisms. The cult of the
"great" conductor also tends to substitute looking
for listening, so that to conductor and audience
alike (and to reviewers who habitually fall into the
trap of describing a conductor's appearance rather
than the way he makes music sound, and of mistak-
ing the conductor's gestures for the music's mean-
ings), the important part of the performance
becomes the gesture. If you are incapable of listen-
ing, the conductor will show you what to feel.
Thus, the film-actor type of conductor will act out a
life of Napoleon in "his" Eroica1, wear an expres-
sion of noble suffering on the retreat from Moscow
(TV having circumvented the comparatively merci-
ful limitation to the dorsal view) and one of ulti-
mate triumph in the last movement, during which
he even dances the Victory Ball. If you are unable
to listen to the music, you watch the corybantics 2,
and if you are able, you had better not go to the
concert.
1Eroica= a symphony by Beethoven originally dedicated to Napoleon
2corybantics = dancing
1. From Passage 1, the reader can infer that in the
seventeenth century
I. orchestras did not employ a conductor.
II. orchestras were smaller than they are today.
III. orchestral players were better trained and
more skillful.
A. I only
B. II only
C. I and II only
D. I and III only
E. I, II, and III
2. From its use in Passage 1 (line 29) it can be
inferred that the word "Apollonian" means
A. sunny and optimistic.
B. Wagnerian.
C. emotionally intense.
D. Bacchic.
E. clear and elegant.
3. According to Passage 1, instrumentalists and
singers have an advantage over a conductor
because they
A. have only to do what the conductor directs.
B. need not master the mechanics of
conducting.
C. must cope with only one instrument, not a
hundred.
D. must be able to read music.
E. need not understand the meaning of a score.
4. Of which of the following kinds of conductor
described in Passage 1 would the author of that
passage be most likely to approve?
A. One "dedicated . . . to an exact realization of
the score" (lines 14-15)
B. One "coloring [the score] with his own
emotions and his own creative impulse"
C. One whose performances "seemed clear but
were dry as dust" (lines 32-33)
D. One in whose performances "passion became
simple distortion" (lines 33-34)
E. One who is both "elegant" and "passionate"
and can "personalize the score" (lines 26-28
5. By adding the parenthetical phrase "including
critics" (line 66) the author of Passage 2 suggests
all of the following EXCEPT
A. Music critics and society women are alike.
B. Music critics are more interested in
orchestras than in orchestra conductors.
C. Music critics are more important to a
conductor's success than are the conductor's
musical abilities.
D. Music critics are less interested in musical
ability than are orchestra players.
E. Music critics are less able to judge musical
qualities than are musicians.
Part II: Practice-Review-Analyze-Practice
6. The author of Passage 2 believes that politicians
are
A. original thinkers.
B. career-minded.
C. highly disciplined professionals.
D. modest and self-effacing.
E. indifferent to power.
7. By the phrase "the incidence of ego disease is
naturally high" (lines 71-72), the author of the
Passage 2 means
A. there is a great deal of illness among
musicians.
B. conductors are rarely sick.
C. conducting is a dangerous and demanding
profession.
D. conductors are very self centered.
E. orchestras are likely to thrive in tropical
countries.
8. In Passage 2, the distinction implied in lines 78-79
between the "music-business community" and the
"musical community" is that
A. in the music-business community,
conductors are undervalued.
B. in the music-business community, composers
are overvalued.
C. in the musical community, music is more
important than personality.
D. only the music-business community is
concerned with money.
E. the music-business community is concerned
with popular music, and the musical
community with classical music.
9. The phrase "TV having circumvented the
comparatively merciful limitation to the dorsal
view" (lines 100-101) in Passage 2 can be best
understood to mean
A. television has brought conductors to a much
larger audience than ever before.
B. television allows the viewer to see and hear
details of a performance that are not clear in
the concert hall.
C. television distorts both the sound and the
appearance of a symphony concert.
D. television unfortunately allows the viewers to
see the front of the conductor.
E. television programs have the fortunate
advantage of being easily turned off.
10 . In the last paragraph of Passage 2, the phrase "if
you are able" refers to
I. visualize the "Victory Ball."
II. "listen to the music."
III. "watch the corybantics."
A. II only
B. III only
C. I and III only
D. II and III only
E. I, II, and III
11. The author of Passage 2 either directly or
obliquely makes fun of all the following EXCEPT
A. conductors.
B. politicians.
C. the musical public.
D. music critics.
E. orchestral players.
12 . Of the following kinds of conductor described in
Passage 1, which would the author of Passage 2 be
most likely to approve?
A. One "dedicated . . . to an exact realization of
the score" (lines 14-15)
B. One "coloring [the score] with his own
emotions and his own creative impulse"
C. One whose performances "seemed clear but
were dry as dust" (lines 32-33)
D. One in whose performances "passion became
simple distortion" (lines 33-34)
E. One who is both "elegant" and "passionate"
and can "personalize the score" (lines 33,
13 . Which of the following words is used in both
passages but with totally different connotations?
A. "conductor"
B. "exact"
C. "music"
D. "great"
E. "orchestra"
Practice Test 2
Practice Test 2
GO ON TO THE NEXT PAGE
14 . That both passages were written at mid-century
rather than very recently is suggested by their
I. assumption that an orchestra will be led by a
conductor rather than by a concert-master.
II. assumption that a conductor is a male.
III. assumption that a performance may be
reviewed by a music critic.
A. I only
B. II only
C. III only
D. I and II only
E. I, II, and III
Part II: Practice-Review-Analyze-Practice
IF YOU FINISH BEFORE TIME IS CALLED, CHECK YOUR WORK ON THIS
SECTION ONLY . DO NOT WORK ON ANY OTHER SECTION IN THE TEST. STOP
Practice Test 2
Practice Test 2
GO ON TO THE NEXT PAGE
Section 8: Mathematics
Time: 20 Minutes
15 Questions
Directions: Solve each problem in this section by using the information given and your own mathematical calcula-
tions, insights, and problem-solving skills. Then select the one correct answer of the five choices given and mark the
corresponding circle on your answer sheet. Use the available space on the page for your scratch work.
Notes
1. All numbers used are real numbers.
2. Calculators can be used.
3. Some problems may be accompanied by figures or diagrams. These figures are drawn as accurately as possible
EXCEPT when it is stated in a specific problem that a figure is not drawn to scale. The figures and diagrams are
meant to provide information useful in solving the problem or problems. Unless otherwise stated, all figures and
diagrams lie in a plane.
Data That Can Be Used for Reference
rectangle
A = lw
Area
triangle
circle
rectangular solid
V = lwh
Volume
right circular cylinder
Pythagorean Relationship
Special T riangles
A circle is composed of 360°
A straight angle measures 180°
The sum of the angles of a triangle is 180°
w
l
h
b
r
M
r
h
l
h
w
a2 + b2 = c 2
C B
A
c
a
b
x
x
1. What is .25% of 12?
C. 3
D. 3
2. A square 4 inches on a side is cut up into smaller
squares 1 inch on a side. What is the maximum
number of such squares that can be formed?
A. 4
B. 8
3. If a book costs $5.70 after a 40% discount, what
was its original price?
B. 9
Part II: Practice-Review-Analyze-Practice
5. According to the graph above, which county had
the most bear sightings before the conservation
measures?
A. 1
B. 2
C. 3
D. 4
E. 5
6. If (x + 1) times (2x + 1) is an odd integer, then x
must be
A. an odd integer.
B. an even integer.
C. a prime number.
D. a composite number.
E. a negative number.
7. ,A and AC AB40 130If thenE == =%% % $
E. Cannot be determined from the given
information.
A
B
C
BA BABA BABA
counties
number of sightings
B = before
A = after
Number of Wild Bear Sightings Before and After
Conservation Measures in Five Different Counties
Practice Test 2
Practice Test 2
GO ON TO THE NEXT PAGE
8. A certain geometry class has 36 students. If two-
thirds of the students are boys and three-fourths of
the boys are under six feet tall, how many boys in
the class are under six feet tall?
A. 6
9. If ,xx3 6 15 then+= =
A. 3
B. -3
C. -3, 3
D. -7, 3
E. -7, 7
10 . What is the area of the trapezoid above in square
inches?
11. If fx 3
x
=^h + 4 and x is an integer, then which of
the following could be a value of fx^h ?
A. 3
B. 4
E. 9
Part II: Practice-Review-Analyze-Practice
12 . If y x x1= - , then x =
A. y 1
B. y
y1 -
C. y
y
D. y + 1
E. y 1
13 . Three factories of Conglomerate Corporation are
capable of manufacturing hubcaps. Two of the
factories can each produce 100,000 hubcaps in 15
days. The third factory can produce hubcaps 30%
faster. Approximately how many days would it
take to produce a million hubcaps with all three
factories working simultaneously?
14 . If ,yy4 3 14 50 then++ = =
C. -9
15 . What is the area in square yards of an equilateral
triangle if the length of one of its sides is 12 yards?
Practice Test 2
Practice Test 2
IF YOU FINISH BEFORE TIME IS CALLED, CHECK YOUR WORK ON THIS
SECTION ONLY . DO NOT WORK ON ANY OTHER SECTION IN THE TEST. STOP
1. In poor and politically unsettled countries, trucks
are the only means of getting in or out, public
A. indecipherable
B. ubiquitous
C. indifferent
D. inadequate
E. nonexistent
many of them less than three pages long.
A. wit
B. sincerity
C. cynicism
D. economy
E. development
3. Because most parents who watched Sesame Street
as children are likely to regard the show as
A. educational . . . alienate
B. obligatory . . . rely on
C. compulsory . . . avoid
D. required . . . apprehend
E. habitual . . . expect
when all the best economic advisors were
recommending against doing so.
A. conservative
B. maverick
C. investor
D. Tory
E. moderate
Part II: Practice-Review-Analyze-Practice
Section 9: Critical Reading
Time: 25 Minutes
28 Questions
In this section, choose the best answer for each question and blacken the corresponding space on the answer sheet.
Directions: Each blank in the following sentences indicates that something has been omitted. Consider the lettered
words beneath the sentence and choose the word or set of words that best fits the whole sentence.
EXAMPLE:
continent.
A. impoverished
B. successful
C. populous
D. developed
E. militant
The correct answer is C.
5. The clothes she designs for men are conservative,
A. liberal
B. flamboyant
C. tasteful
D. expensive
E. conventional
the warden at risk.
A. vigorous . . . unpopular
B. realistic . . . costly
C. unregarded . . . profitable
D. outspoken . . . lucrative
E. tactful . . . popular
discover even smaller particles, we have
are very close to a knowledge of nature's ultimate
building blocks.
A. unlikely . . . have misapprehended
B. uncertain . . . have approached
C. possible . . . have reached
D. probable . . . have avoided
E. moot . . . have acquired
8. Contrary to several sports writers' opinions,
affable and articulate young man.
A. sullen . . . winsome
B. genial . . . quiet
C. morose. . . reticent
D. gracious . . . impolite
E. aggressive . . . well spoken
9. In 1900, Spanish operatic composers faced a
problem of language, for if works were not written
to sing them.
A. refused
B. hoped
C. vocalized
D. desired
E. preferred
10 . The reason for reduced spending on arms
of money.
A. ideological . . . economic
B. personal . . . political
C. pacifist . . . practical
D. local . . . universal
E. liberal . . . conservative
Practice Test 2
Practice Test 2
GO ON TO THE NEXT PAGE
Questions 11-12 are based on the following passage.
Native American oral tradition includes legends,
trickster tales, and "coup" stories. Legends differ
from myths in that they arise from historical events
and are exaggerated over time. (In American folk-
lore, Daniel Boone supposedly could kill a bear
with his bare hands.) A common Native American
figure is Trickster, who takes on different shapes,
depending on a tribe's location-for example,
Coyote in the Southwest, Raven in the Northwest,
and Jay or Wolverine in Canada. Trickster tales are
used, depending on tribal tradition, to instruct, in-
spire, entertain or present a culture hero who may
save the world. "Coup" stories are warriors' tales of
their brave deeds in battle. These warriors are also
culture heroes, but the truth of a "coup" story must
be verified by other warriors who were present.
11. The sentence in parentheses in lines 4-6 is
included primarily to
A. provide for the reader a familiar example of a
legend.
B. add humor to the passage.
C. suggest the similarity between Trickster and
Daniel Boone.
D. show the difference between legend and
"coup" stories.
E. explain the relationship between American
folklore and Native American oral tradition.
12 . According to information in the passage, which of
the following statements is accurate?
A. Legends are more important to Native
Americans than myths.
B. Trickster varies in form from location to
location, but the tales serve the same
purposes.
C. Myths and legends are designed to entertain,
whereas "coup" stories are used to instruct.
D. "Coup" stories are more exciting and
interesting than legends because they are
true.
E. The oldest form in the Native American
tradition is the myth.
Questions 13-14 are based on the following passage.
At the outset of the Civil War, the North pos-
sessed a large population, a superior rail system, a
greater industrial capacity, greater capital assets,
and a larger food-production capability than did the
South. Despite the North's apparent economic supe-
riority, the South did possess a few military advan-
tages. Among them were fighting a defensive war
on their home ground and an established military
tradition. Most of the leaders of the pre-War army
were from the South, whereas the North had to train
a new military leadership.
13 . The final sentence of the paragraph
A. supports the contention that most of the
talent in the United States is concentrated in
the South.
B. hints that the North found its military leaders
in the South.
C. criticizes the North for entering the war
without trained leadership.
D. supports the statement that the South had an
established military tradition.
E. indicates that the South should have won
the war.
14 . The author implies which of the following points
in the passage?
A. The North didn't have an economic
advantage at the end of the war.
B. Previous to the beginning of the war, the
South was already fighting another war and
seasoning its leaders.
C. Almost all the banks in the United States
were located in the North.
D. Military advantages are much more
important that economic advantages.
E. The North had a greater capacity for
enduring a prolonged conflict.
Part II: Practice-Review-Analyze-Practice
Directions: Questions follow the passage below. Using only the stated or implied information in the passage and in its
introduction, if any, answer the questions.
Questions 15-16 are based on the following passage.
In the middle of the 20th century, as television
became more and more popular, pundits predicted
that the new medium would be instrumental in pro-
moting greater understanding among the people of
the world. If war correspondents could show pic-
tures of the horror and devastation of war, surely
nations would renounce violence. If viewers were
shown the lives of average people torn apart by
conflict, surely they would insist that their leaders
make peace. Television, they predicted, would in-
crease our knowledge and understanding, and by
the year 2000 the world would be free from war,
and its inhabitants would be better educated, more
tolerant, and happier than ever before in history.
15 . This paragraph is most likely the introduction
to a(n)
A. account of the increasing popularity of
television.
B. recounting of the early days of television.
C. criticism of an overly optimistic view of
television.
D. questioning of the value of "reality"
television.
E. study of the limitations of print journalism.
16 . The pundits of line 2 have assumed that
A. the nature of man is essentially unchanging.
B. television would replace film as the most
popular form of entertainment.
C. a television image is more powerful than a
voice on the radio.
D. there is no scale to measure degrees of
happiness in men.
E. television is a more democratic medium than
print journalism.
Questions 17-28 are based on the following passage.
Acid rain, in the past half decade, has been
added to the technological world's litany of fears.
Like carbon dioxide, it is an unintended by-product
of the Industrial Revolution. Evidence strongly
suggests that pollutants in the atmosphere are acid-
ifying rains, lakes, and streams.
The problem is not well understood. It is not
even well named. The words would sound less sin-
ister if it were commonly known that all rains and
snows are naturally acidic. A substance's acidity is
measured on the pH scale, in which 7 is perfectly
neutral, neither acidic nor alkaline. Speaking very
roughly, the average pH of rain in nature-though
it varies from place to place on the globe-is thought
to be 5.6, which is slightly acidic.
In many parts of the industrial world, however,
and in forested country far downwind of factory
country, the pH of rains and snows is much lower.
Rainfall in the eastern United States is currently es-
timated by the Environmental Protection Agency to
be about pH 4.5. The pH scale is logarithmic,
which means that as one counts down the scale,
each integer is 10 times more acidic than normal.
And they often become worse. "One long rainfall
in the autumn of 1978 holds a dubious national
record," environmentalist and writer John Luoma
reports in his book Troubled Skies, Troubled
Waters."Instruments registered values less than pH
2, a level six to eight times more acidic than vine-
gar and some five thousand times more acidic than
normal rain." The pollutants responsible for this in-
crease are chiefly sulfur dioxide and the oxides of
nitrogen. Swirled and cooked together with other
gases and chemicals in the atmosphere, they can
combine to form, among other things, sulfuric acid,
which then falls on our country's soil and gathers in
our lakes. Those lakes most at risk are in territory
that was scraped clean of topsoil during the last ad-
vances and retreats of the ice age. In the great chain
of wilderness lakes that extends from northern
Minnesota into Canada, in the Appalachians, and in
much of Scandinavia, the ice scoured right down to
the bedrock, and the new soil that has collected
there is still quite thin. These regions are poor in
the kind of natural alkaline rock, like limestone,
that elsewhere helps to neutralize acid rain. Many
of their lakes have been greatly acidified, altering
their chemistry in complex ways that are only be-
ginning to be understood. Fish in these lakes have
died off. The water is eerily clear and clean, be-
cause in it so little life survives.
Ironically, part of the problem is an engineering
feat that was once seen as the problem's solution.
Coal-burning plants such as Kyger Creek, and the
General James M. Gavin plant, both in Cheshire,
Ohio, have built huge smokestacks (Gavin's is over
1,000 feet high) to loft their emissions of sulfur
dioxide and nitrogen oxides high into the atmos-
phere and keep these wastes from sickening their
neighbors in Cheshire. The gases are borne extraor-
dinary distances in the upper atmosphere, where
they have plenty of time and space to recombine
into sulfuric acid, which then falls thousands of
miles from Kyger Creek and Gavin. Tall stacks
help convert acid rain from a local to an environ-
mental problem.
Practice Test 2
Practice Test 2
GO ON TO THE NEXT PAGE
Environmentalists and industrialists agree that
acid rain is poorly understood and must be studied
further. But they disagree about what to do in the
meantime. Some argue for several kinds of preven-
tive action now. For instance, expensive "scrub-
bers" could be installed immediately by plants
such as Kyger Creek and Gavin to clean sulfur
dioxides from the stacks' emissions. But many
other people-including most of those who would
have to pay to install the scrubbers-think the ex-
pense premature. The issue has as many sides as
any in climatology. Some of the chemical emis-
sions in question even make good fertilizer. Notes
climatologist Reid Bryson of the University of
Wisconsin, "It may be the old saying about a silver
lining to every cloud-but here in Wisconsin, when
they cleaned up the sulfur emissions from one of
our local power plants, the farmers in the area had
to start adding sulfur to their fields."
Though the debate continues, Jon Luoma says,
"the difficulties in the way of reducing acid rain are
not so much scientific as political."
17. The second paragraph describes acid rain as "not
even well named" because
A. rain is naturally acidic.
B. no liquids are perfectly neutral.
C. some rains are alkaline.
D. the public cannot understand the meaning of
the phrase.
E. the phrase makes acid rain appear to be a
serious problem.
18 . The first sentence of the third paragraph refers to
"forested country far downwind of factory country"
as having rains and snows of low pH because
A. industrial pollution travels upwind.
B. the pH scale is logarithmic.
C. rainfall is heavier in forested country.
D. all rainfall is acidic.
E. pollution from factories is blown here by
winds.
19 . From the information in the third paragraph, it can
be inferred that the pH of vinegar is probably
A. 2
B. 4
C. 6
D. 7
E. 8
20. In the third paragraph, the phrase "a dubious
national record" is best taken to mean a
A. record not scientifically confirmed.
B. record not generally accepted as a record.
C. record not expected to endure.
D. local rather than an international record.
E. record not worth achieving.
21. Of the following, which would be the most
alkaline?
A. A liquid with a pH of 3
B. A liquid with a pH of 5
C. A liquid with a pH of 7
D. A liquid with a pH of 9
E. A liquid with a pH of 11
22. The passage suggests that an area with limestone
may be harmed less by acid rain because
A. no rain will run off into lakes and streams.
B. streams will be more abundant and faster
flowing.
C. the limestone may neutralize the acid.
D. the limestone will absorb less water than
other rocks.
E. limestone is a natural by-product of coal
burning.
23. As it is used in line 51, the word "eerily" means
A. scrupulously
B. immaculately
C. strangely
D. partially
E. ostensibly
24. In line 53, the adverb "ironically" is used because
A. the smokestacks failed to protect Cheshire.
B. the result is the opposite of what was
expected.
C. the builders of the smokestacks failed to
consider the problems of acid rain.
D. smokestacks cannot solve the problems of
acid rain.
E. engineers, rather than scientists, were
responsible for the construction.
Part II: Practice-Review-Analyze-Practice
25. Near the end of the fifth paragraph, the reference
to "the old saying about a silver lining to every
cloud" is used because
A. some effects of acid rain are beneficial.
B. there is hope that someday acid rain
problems will be eliminated.
C. acid rain falls far from the source of
pollution.
D. the solution to the problem of acid rain is
political, not scientific.
E. lakes in some regions are now clear and
clean because of acid rain.
26. The chief antagonists in the debate about how to
deal with causes of acid rain are most likely to be
A. industrial polluters and farmers.
B. industrialists and environmentalists.
C. the federal government and private
landowners.
D. farmers whose soils benefit from acid rain
and farmers whose soils do not.
E. foresters and fishermen.
27. The passage implies that acid rain could be
reduced by all of the following EXCEPT
A. emission controls on smokestacks.
B. reduction of coal burning in industry.
C. reduction of sulfur dioxide in the
atmosphere.
D. reduction of the use of sulfur as fertilizer.
E. reduction of oxides of nitrogen in the
atmosphere.
28. That "the difficulties in the way of reducing acid
rain are not so much scientific as political" is due
chiefly to the fact that
A. scientists do not yet fully understand acid
rain.
B. the side effects of acid rain can be beneficial
as well as harmful.
C. many scientists believe preventive measures
should be undertaken immediately.
D. acid rain falls on areas at great distances
from the source of pollution.
E. the cost of cleaning sulfur dioxides from
smokestacks may be paid by the federal
government.
Practice Test 2
Practice Test 2
IF YOU FINISH BEFORE TIME IS CALLED, CHECK YOUR WORK ON THIS
SECTION ONLY . DO NOT WORK ON ANY OTHER SECTION IN THE TEST. STOP
1. The operas of Mozart are very frequently
performed in Austria; Verdi operas are the
favorites in Italy.
A. Austria; Verdi operas
B. Austria Verdi operas
C. Austria, although Verdi operas
D. Austria; while Verdi operas
E. Austria the operas of Verdi
2. The book argues that Othello is the better play
because of its construction, which is more careful
that that of King Lear.
A. because of its construction, which is more
careful than that of King Lear.
B. because its construction, which is more
careful than King Lear's.
C. because of its construction, more careful than
King Lear's construction.
D. because it is more carefully constructed than
King Lear.
E. because its construction is more careful than
King Lear.
3. A valuable device taking advantage of the
remarkable sensitivity of cesium has just been
constructed, and scientists have known of this
capability for many years.
A. constructed, and scientists have known of
this capability for many years.
B. constructed, which scientists have known
about for many years.
C. constructed, although scientists have known
of this capability for many years.
D. constructed, and this capability has been
known to scientists for many years.
E. constructed, a capability about which
scientists have known for many years.
4. The doctor visits her patients in intensive care
once every three hours, which can be decreased
as danger lessens.
A. which can be decreased
B. a schedule that can be altered
C. which can be altered
D. to be decreased
E. and can be altered
Part II: Practice-Review-Analyze-Practice
Section 1 0: Writing-Multiple Choice
Time: 10 Minutes
15 Questions
In this section, choose the best answer for each question and blacken the corresponding space on the answer sheet.
Directions: The following questions test correctness and effective expression. In selecting the answer, pay attention
to grammar, diction, sentence structure, and punctuation. In the following questions, part or all of each sentence is
underlined. The A answer repeats the underlined portion of the original sentence, while the next four offer alternatives.
Choose the answer that best expresses the meaning of the original sentence, and at the same time is grammatically cor-
rect and stylistically superior. The correct choice should be clear, unambiguous, and concise.
EXAMPLE:
The forecaster predicted rain and the sky was clear.
A. rain and the sky was clear.
B. rain but the sky was clear.
C. rain the sky was clear.
D. rain, but the sky was clear.
E. rain being as the sky was clear.
The correct answer is D.
5. Enjoying the look of a movie musical-its sets,
costumes, and dances-is as important as enjoying
its songs.
A Enjoying the look of a movie musical-its
sets, costumes, and dances-is
B. The look of a movie musical-its sets,
costumes, and dances-is
C. The look of a movie musical-its sets,
costumes, and dances-are
D. In a movie musical, the sets costumes and
dances are
E. The sets, costumes and dances of a movie
musical are
6. Ardmore has been cheated several times because
of his being of a trusting nature.
A. because of his being of a trusting nature.
B. because of his trustworthiness.
C. because his nature is trusting.
D. because he is trusting.
E. being trusting by nature.
7. A very old plant in our gardens, the cornflower
appears in paintings made as early as the fourth
century.
A. the cornflower appears in paintings made as
early as the fourth century.
B. cornflowers appear in paintings made as
early as the fourth century.
C. fourth-century-made paintings show
cornflowers.
D. paintings of cornflowers were made as early
as the fourth century.
E. paintings of cornflowers made as early as the
fourth century.
8. Tomoka Seki studied ballet in France for two
years, and now she is studying Balinese dancing
and Asian art.
A. Tomoka Seki studied ballet in France for two
years, and now she is
B. Having studied ballet in France for two
years, Tomoka Seki is now
C. Ballet was studied in France for two years by
Tomoka Seki who is now
D. She studied ballet in France for two years,
and now Tomoka Seki is
E. For two years, Tomoka Seki studies ballet in
France now she is
9. Struggling with every word, the essay was
completed by John at the expense of several hours
sleep.
A. the essay was completed by John
B. John completed the essay
C. the essay John completed
D. the essay completed itself
E. the essay itself was completed
10 . Like the mountains that are found in Switzerland,
the mountains of Colorado and Wyoming keep
their snows for ten months.
A. Like the mountains that are found in
Switzerland,
B. Like the mountains located in Switzerland,
C. Like the mountains found in Switzerland,
D. Like those in Switzerland,
E. Like mountains which are Swiss,
11. In the Trenton News, they report that there are
as many as 10,000 homeless people in
Washington, D.C.
A. In the Trenton News, they report that
B. In the Trenton News, it is reported that
C. In the Trenton News, they issued the report
that
D. The Trenton News reports that
E. The Trenton News makes the report that
Practice Test 2
Practice Test 2
GO ON TO THE NEXT PAGE
12 . Paris Mayor Jacques Chirac after a multi-million
dollar face-lift dedicated the refurbished Champs
Elysees.
A. Paris Mayor Jacques Chirac after a multi-
million dollar face-lift dedicated the
refurbished Champs Elysees.
B. After a multi-million dollar face-lift, Jacques
Chirac, mayor of Paris, dedicated the
refurbished Champs Elysees.
C. A multi-million dollar face-lift completed,
Paris Mayor Jacques Chirac dedicated the
refurbished Champs Elysees.
D. After Jacques Chirac, Paris Mayor,
completed a multi-million dollar face-lift, he
dedicated the refurbished Champs Elysees.
E. Paris Mayor Jacques Chirac dedicated the
refurbished Champs Elysees after a multi-
million dollar face-lift.
13 . Completing the film on time was as satisfying to
the director of Beneath the Sea, as mastering the
underwater camera techniques.
A. as mastering
B. as his being able to master
C. as it was when mastering
D. than the mastery of
E. the fact that he mastered
14 . Lured by the Florida sun, Canadians by the
thousands descend annually into St. Petersburg
each year.
A. Canadians by the thousands descend
annually into St. Petersburg each year.
B. St. Petersburg receives thousands of
Canadians each year.
C. St. Petersburg annually receives thousands
of Canadians.
D. Canadians by the thousands descend on
St. Petersburg each year.
E. thousands of Canadians descend into
St. Petersburg each year.
15 . At the door of the kitchen, he stopped to wipe the
mud from his boots, ran a comb through his hair,
and knocks loudly at the door.
A. and knocks loudly at the door.
B. and knocks loud at the door.
C. and knocked loudly at the door.
D. and then knocks loudly on the door.
E. knocking at the door loudly.
Part II: Practice-Review-Analyze-Practice
IF YOU FINISH BEFORE TIME IS CALLED, CHECK YOUR WORK ON THIS
SECTION ONLY . DO NOT WORK ON ANY OTHER SECTION IN THE TEST. STOP
Scoring Practice Test 2
Answer Key for Practice Test 2
Section 2: Writing-Multiple Choice
Practice Test 2
Practice Test 2
1. D
2. C
3. B
4. E
5. D
6. C
7. E
8. D
9. B
Section 3: Critical Reading
1. A
2. E
3. C
4. B
5. D
6. B
7. C
8. B
9. D
Section 4: Mathematics
1. D
2. B
3. D
4. C
5. B
6. B
7. C
8. D
9. D
Section 5: Critical Reading
1. A
2. C
3. E
4. C
5. E
6. A
7. A
8. E
9. A
Section 6: Mathematics
Part II: Practice-Review-Analyze-Practice
1. E
2. D
3. C
4. C
5. C
6. B
7. A
8. C
9. C
Section 7: Critical Reading
1. C
2. E
3. C
4. E
5. B
6. B
7. D
8. C
9. D
Section 8: Mathematics
1. A
2. C
3. E
4. A
5. D
6. B
7. C
8. C
9. D
Section 9: Critical Reading
1. E
2. D
3. B
4. B
5. B
6. D
7. C
8. C
9. A
Section 1 0: Writing-Multiple Choice
1. A
2. D
3. C
4. B
5. A
6. D
7. A
8. B
9. B
Analyzing Your Test Results
The charts on the following pages should be used to carefully analyze your results and spot your strengths and weak-
nesses. The complete process of analyzing each subject area and each individual problem should be completed for each
practice test. These results should then be reexamined for trends in types of errors (repeated errors) or poor results in
specific subject areas. This reexamination and analysis is of tremendous importance to you in assuring maximum test
preparation benefit.
Reviewing the Essay
Have an English teacher, tutor, or someone else with good writing skills read and evaluate your essay using the Essay
Checklist given below. Have your reader evaluate the complete essay as good, average, or marginal. Note that your paper
would actually be scored from 1 to 6 by two trained readers (actual total score 2-12). But since we are trying only for a
rough approximation, the simple good, average, or marginal overall evaluation will give you a general feeling for your
score range.
Use the following checklist to evaluate your essay:
■ Does the essay focus on the topic and complete the assigned task?
(Circle one: Excellent Average Poor)
■ Is the essay well organized, well developed, and consistent in argument?
(Circle one: Excellent Average Poor)
■ Does the essay use specific supporting details?
(Circle one: Excellent Average Poor)
■ Does the writing use correct grammar, usage, punctuation, and spelling?
(Circle one: Excellent Average Poor)
■ Is the handwriting legible?
(Circle one: Excellent Average Poor)
Critical Reading Analysis Sheet
Section 3 Possible Completed Right Wrong
Sentence Completion 1 0
Short Reading Passages 4
Long Reading Passages 1 4
Subtotal 28
Section 5 Possible Completed Right Wrong
Sentence Completion 9
Short Critical Reading Passages 7
Long Reading Passages 1 2
Subtotal 28
(continued)
Practice Test 2
Practice Test 2
Critical Reading Analysis Sheet (continued)
Section 7 Possible Completed Right Wrong
Long Reading Passages 1 4
Subtotal 14
Section 9 Possible Completed Right Wrong
Sentence Completion 1 0
Short Reading Passages 6
Long Reading Passages 1 2
Subtotal 28
Overall Critical Reading Totals 98
Note: Only 3 Critical Reading sections (approximately 70 questions) count toward your actual score on the new SAT.
Mathematics Analysis Sheet
Section 4 Possible Completed Right Wrong
Multiple Choice 20
Subtotal 20
Section 6 Possible Completed Right Wrong
Multiple Choice 1 0
Grid-Ins 1 0
Subtotal 20
Section 8 Possible Completed Right Wrong
Multiple Choice 1 5
Subtotal 15
Overall Math Totals 55
Part II: Practice-Review-Analyze-Practice
Writing-Multiple-Choice Analysis Sheet
Section 2 Possible Completed Right Wrong
Improving Sentences 7
Identifying Sentence Errors 1 9
Improving Paragraphs 8
Subtotal 34
Section 10 Possible Completed Right Wrong
Improving Sentences 1 5
Subtotal 15
Overall Writing- 49
Multiple-Choice Totals
Analysis/Tally Sheet for Problems Missed
One of the most important parts of test preparation is analyzing why you missed a problem so that you can reduce the
number of mistakes. Now that you have taken the practice test and checked your answers, carefully tally your mistakes
by marking them in the proper column.
Reason for Mistakes
Total Simple Misread Lack of Lack of
Missed Mistake Problem Knowledge Time
Section 3: Critical Reading
Section 5: Critical Reading
Section 7: Critical Reading
Section 9: Critical Reading
Subtotal
Section 4: Mathematics
Section 6: Mathematics
Section 8: Mathematics
Subtotal
Section 2: Writing-Multiple Choice
Section 1 0: Writing-Multiple Choice
Subtotal
Total Reading, Math, and Writing
Reviewing the preceding data should help you determine why you are missing certain problems. Now that you've pin-
pointed the type of error, compare it to other practice tests to spot other common mistakes.
Practice Test 2
Practice Test 2
Complete Answers and Explanations for Practice Test 2
Section 2: Writing-Multiple Choice
Improving Sentences
1. D. The subject of the dependent clause that begins this sentence is the pronoun "they." What should follow is
a noun to explain who the "they" are. It is not "cheeses" or "cheese" as in A, B, and C. D correctly puts "the
colonists" first in the main clause, and also gets rid of the passive verbs of A, B, and C. D is preferable to E,
because it avoids the separation of the modifying phrase and what it modifies.
2. C. The original sentence is not grammatically wrong, but it is wordy. It repeats the preposition "about," and uses
the passive voice. B is even wordier, though it does get rid of the passive. D uses the fewest words, but it is
ungrammatical. The pronoun should refer to the plural "sicknesses"; it appears to refer to the singular "society."
E repeats the "about" needlessly; all other things being equal, "remedies" is probably better than "remedying"
since it is a noun like "sicknesses," rather than a gerund.
3. B. There are two complete sentences here with no punctuation or conjunction to join them. The easiest way to
correct the run-on sentence is with the semicolon. E is not wrong, but it is wordier.
4. E. The original sentence has a subject, but no main verb, since "lead" is in a dependent clause. C has no verb or
verbals. B and D have participles, that is, adjectives, not verbs. Only E is a complete sentence with its main verb
("will lead") in the future tense.
5. D. This sentence uses a pronoun ("this") without a specific antecedent; "this" refers to the general idea of the
whole first clause. To use a different pronoun, as B, C, and E do, without supplying the missing specific
antecedent does not correct the sentence. Only D solves the problem. The specific antecedent for the pronoun
"that" is the noun "practice."
6. C. The original sentence begins with a second person subject ("you"), but switches to the third person ("it").
Only C keeps "you" as the subject of the main clause, and also uses a verb in the active voice. B, D, and E all
use the passive.
7. E. As soon as you see a sentence that begins, like this one, with a participle, look to see if it dangles. Who is
carrying the warm water? Not the "sparrows." Not the "groups." The only possible right answer is E.
Identifying Sentence Errors
8. D. The sentence begins with two gerunds and a main verb all in the present tense. To keep the sequence of verb
tenses consistent, the last verb must be the present "is," not the future "will be."
9. B. The choice of pronoun is in error here. Since the pronoun refers to a man, "who" rather than "which'' is the
right word.
10 . B. This is the subject-verb agreement error, disguised by the separation of the singular subject "one" and the
interrupting plurals "of the sixty-five students majoring in economics." The right verb is the singular "was."
11. D. Since "wouldn't" contains a negative, the second "no" makes a double negative. The corrected sentence can
read "would be no" or "wouldn't be any."
12 . E. You should think twice about the case of the pronouns here, but remember that "who" and "whom" are not
likely to appear on the test. The "who" here is right. The "she" is also right. The verb "to be" does not take an
object. Don't forget that each test will contain several sentences with no error.
13 . D. The sentence confuses an idiom, using an infinitive ("to follow") where the conventional usage calls for the
prepositional phrase ("regularity in following").
14 . C. This is a pronoun agreement error. The sentence begins with the singular noun "a person," but instead of
saying "by himself" or "by herself" switches to the plural "themselves."
Part II: Practice-Review-Analyze-Practice
15 . E. The sentence is correct. Though the verb tenses vary, they present a logical time scheme.
16 . C. Here the verb tenses are not coherent. Two of the verbs ("paints" and "spirits") are in the present tense, but
"sealed" for no reason is a past tense.
17. D. This is another pronoun agreement error, easy to miss even though the singular noun ("plant") and the erring
plural pronoun ("themselves") are together.
18 . B. The idiom is "neither...nor," not the "neither...and" we have here.
19 . C. The use of "destruct" as the main verb is an error of diction. A better choice would be "destroy."
20. D. The comparison that ends this sentence is needlessly doubled. Since "lower" means "more low," the "more"
should be deleted.
21. E. This sentence appears to be testing parallelism, but the parallel construction "not to please" with "but to
impress" is right. The future tenses of the verbs are also correct.
22. A. The comparison here is not logical. Monet (a painter) is compared to paintings. The correct sentence should
read "Unlike Monet's."
23. B. With the "neither... nor" construction here, the subject is a singular (either "nurse" or "I"). The verb should
be "was able."
24. B. In this context, the correct idiom meaning "accused of" is "charged with," rather than "charged for."
25. A. With the plural "There are," the noun must also be plural to agree; "the requirement" should be "requirements."
26. C. The antecedent of the pronoun "one" is the plural "westerners"; the pronoun should be "they."
Improving Paragraphs
27. E. The problem with this sentence is the tense of the verb. The other two sentences in the paragraph that begin
with "It is disproved" deal with situations in the past that continue to occur: dishonest politicians are still elected,
and juries still make mistakes. For this reason, the use of the present tense is correct. Hitler, however, is no longer
elected, so the verb should be in the past tense. Option E corrects the tense, and at the same time keeps the
rhetorical balance of repeating "It...disproved."
28. D. Sentence 4 is an anticlimax. It is vague (What high school? What happened?) and more relevant to the next
paragraph. The three other examples in this paragraph are more specific and more cogent.
29. A. The deliberate repetition of the phrase "it is disproved" is an effective way of emphasizing how often the
majority may be wrong. There are no instances of the other choices in the paragraph.
30. B. Though several of these sentences are not wrong, B, with its subject-verb-object word order, is preferable to
the expletive "there was" of A or the passive verb of D. In C and E, the "they" is a vague pronoun, with no
specific antecedent.
31. E. There are two problems in these sentences. The phrase "the fastest way" is too far away from "trying to get"
which it modifies. The "this" in the second sentence is a vague pronoun. Option E corrects both by moving "the
fastest way" ahead of "by using" and by eliminating "this."
32. C. The original version of sentence 2 uses a pronoun ("this") with no specific antecedent. Options A, B, D, and E
may move the "this" to different parts of the sentence, but unless there is a specific noun for the pronoun to refer
to, the error is still there. Add a word like "tendency," "problem," "attempt," or "effort" and the pronoun is no
longer vague.
33. C. The original version uses verbs for nouns in a series that lacks parallelism. The best choice must make all
three elements parallel; here, C uses three infinitives ("to earn," "to get," and "to live").
34. E. If you think only about today, you cannot be thinking about tomorrow, so to say so is redundant. The use of
"but" is preferable to "and" in this context.
Practice Test 2
Practice Test 2
Section 3: Critical Reading
Sentence Completion
1. A. The first noun could be any of the five except "similarities," although at first glance, A "differences" looks
like the best. The second blank needs a verb that follows from "understanding," and A "appreciate" is the closest
to the earlier word. Choices B and C make little sense with the fabric metaphor (how can one "resolve" or
"combat" a "fabric"?).
2. E. The phrase "facts, not wishful thinking" is parallel to "realities, not _____," so you need a word that is
opposite to "realities" and similar in effect to "wishful thinking." Only "myths" describes something that
contrasts with "realities."
3. C. The verb "fell" tells you that the first noun must mean "decline" or fall. Choices B "decrease," C "decline,"
and E "drop" are all possibilities. The adjective describing this economy must also denote falling, so you can
eliminate "steady" B and "booming" E, but C "sagging" is appropriate.
4. B. The first adjective must be consistent with the information that the skills have won over both liberals and
conservatives. Choices A, B, and D would fit, and "organizational" C or "intimidating" E would not. The second
blank requires an adverb that parallels or accords with "openly." Both "equivocally" (ambiguously) and
"deceptively" are clearly the opposite of what is needed. The correct choice is B "frankly."
5. D. The missing adjective here should describe the actions of a slanderer. The noun "dissemination" means
spreading abroad; the action of spreading a "libel" or "slander" is not well described by any of these choices
except by D "irresponsible."
6. B. The final adjective must describe songs that satirize love as "foolish" or "compromised." The best choice is
"antiromantic." The four other choices conflict with the assertion of the first half of the sentence.
7. C. If signaling the horse by the voice is part of a "clever ruse," the missing adverb must be something signifying
"secretly" or "without being observed." Only C "covertly" has this meaning. The verb that fills the second blank
must mean something like expose, and C "unmask" fits the requirement.
8. B. The needed word here is a strong way of saying "changeable" or "unpredictable." Of the five choices,
"mercurial" (volatile, "changeable") is clearly the best.
9. D. The sentence presents two related definitions and is a straightforward test of vocabulary. A "cynic" distrusts
"human goodness"; a "misanthrope" hates "people in general." A "pessimist" looks on the dark side of things and
expects the worst; an "ingrate" is an ungrateful person. A "siren" is a temptress; a "tyrant" is an absolute ruler,
usually a cruel or despotic one. An "altruist" is unselfishly concerned for the welfare of others; an "anarchist"
opposes all forms of government. A "philanthropist" is a generous lover of humankind; a "misogynist" is a person
who hates women.
10 . B. If the doctor must be brave to continue her work, the missing verb must describe something to be resisted. The
best choices are "vilified," B, and "attacked," E. The result of the brave work is acceptance by other doctors of the
"probability" or the "tenets" of her theories. "Tenets" usually refers to doctrines or principles of a school of
thought and is not quite right in this context. But both "vilified" (reviled, defamed) and "probability" fit well.
Short Reading Passages
11. C. From the passage it is clear that words that have only one meaning, such as "wrathful," are called "highly
determined." All of the other answers here can have more than one meaning.
12 . A. See lines 3-10. B is simply wrong; "cool" can be used as a verb, noun, and adjective. Although, according to
the passage, some linguists suggest that "cool" has lasted because of its connection to jazz, nothing indicates that
jazz has "increased in popularity," C. E, which is the second best answer, may be related to the point in the passage
that "cool" has lasted because it is easy to say. However, "easy to say" and "one syllable" are not the same thing.
Part II: Practice-Review-Analyze-Practice
13 . B. The word "individualistic" is a clue, as is the phrase "unabashed heroic ethos" in line 15. The "heroic ethos"
is the only specific value system mentioned in the paragraph. Nothing suggests that an "individualistic value
system" is associated with warfare, combat, or the Greek political system, which in fact is not considered in the
passage (A, C, D). E is too vague.
14 . C. A paradox is a statement that is seemingly contradictory but perhaps true. Here, the paradox is that while
writers viewed Homer as the master and admired his great epics, they also targeted his works by parodying them
(that is, creating mock epics) and using them for comic effect. The phrase does not mock the heroic ethos, and no
critical point of view is presented (D, E). It also doesn't emphasize Homer's superiority, A. B might seem a
tempting choice, but there is no "unsolved puzzle," only the observation of a paradox.
Long Reading Passages
15 . E. As it is used here, "want" means need or poverty rather than a wish or desire for something.
16 . A. Franklin's first paragraph makes the point that procuring wealth will secure virtue because it is much harder
for a person in need to resist a temptation to act dishonestly than for one who has no worry about the next meal.
Although Franklin would no doubt encourage self knowledge, education, and reason, the passage specifically
cites wealth as security for virtue.
17. A. Although Franklin was willing to print personal abuse for a fee, he insisted on doing so separately from his
newspaper. He did so because he believed in his obligation to the subscribers of his newspaper, who had no
concern with private altercations. He would "disagree" only with the first of these three statements.
18 . D. Franklin believed that his obligation to his subscribers required him to print material that was useful or
entertaining, materials worth their subscription fees.
19 . C. Although Franklin is remembered as a statesman, scientist, and inventor, his chief means of support, as this
passage implies, was as a printer.
20. D. The first and last paragraphs refer to Franklin's wish to make his publications "entertaining and useful" (line 5)
and "useful or entertaining" (lines 56-57).
21. D. The word "inherent" means innate, inborn, existing in something as a basic characteristic. The problem is
"inherent" because the mirror had been ground to the wrong shape.
22. C. If the mirror had been ground correctly, it would have concentrated 70 percent rather than 15 percent of the
light-that is, 55 percent more than the present 15 percent.
23. B. The passage refers to sudden temperature changes when the telescope passes in and out of the earth's shadow.
24. E. The passage makes no mention of defects in the lens of the telescope.
25. C. As it is used here, the verb means to apply (oneself) to, to deal with, to encounter.
26. C. A telescope's sensitivity is its ability to respond to light (rather than to sound), and the resolution, which can be
computer-enhanced, is the ability to make the image that it detects visible and clear. Of the five choices, C offers
the best definitions.
27. E. The last paragraph deals chiefly with the telescope's success with objects within the solar system. This success
is sufficient to rebut media claims of failure because Hubble makes it possible for astronomers to see the planets
well whenever they want to do so.
28. A. The passage as a whole gives a balanced view of the "Hubble space telescope." It admits the disappointments
and specifies several tasks that the instrument is not yet able to handle. But it also points out the areas in which
the telescope has been successful-not "revolutionary," but useful to astronomers.
Practice Test 2
Practice Test 2
Section 4: Mathematics
1. D. The 4 pounds of steak would cost
The change from a $20 bill would be
2. B. For a number to be divisible by 21, it must be divisible by 3 and by 7 because 21 = 3 × 7. Therefore, if a
number is divisible by 7 but not by 21, it cannot be divisible by 3.
3. D.
yy
y
y
Or, using your calculator, divide 39 by .0039.
4. C. Since XY = YZ = 10, /H17005XYZ is an isosceles triangle and ∠ X = ∠ Z. ∠ Y = 84° because it forms a vertical angle
with the given angle.
5. B. If ab= and b = 81, then a 81= or a = 9. So the value of a is 93= .
6. B. II only. The arithmetic mean is the average (sum divided by number of items), or 6 + 2 + 10 + 2 + 5 = 25
divided by 5 = 5.
The median is the middle number after the numbers have been ordered: 2, 2, 5, 6, 10. The median is 5.
The mode is the most frequently appearing number: 2.
The range is the highest minus the lowest, or 10 - 2 = 8.
Therefore, only II is true: The median (5) equals the mean (5).
X
Y
Z
Part II: Practice-Review-Analyze-Practice
7. C. Since three-fifths of the class are females, two-fifths of the class are males. Therefore, the ratio of males to
females is
to
8. D. First change the equation to slope-intercept form y = mx + b, where m is the slope and b is the y intercept.
xy
xx
yx x
=- - +
Next, you can see that in the equation y = -6x + 3, -6 is in the m position and is therefore the slope.
9. D. Breaking the figure into squares of side x by adding lines gives
Remember that each square has area x2. Then the total area is 41x2. Choices A, B, and E are not possible because
area must be in square units.
10 . A. Adding the two equations,
xy
xy
x
x
x
Since x = 7 or Since x = 7
and x - y = 15 and 3 x + y = 13
y = -8 y = -8
Therefore, x = 7 and y = -8.
Practice Test 2
Practice Test 2
11. D. In isosceles /H17005XYZ, ∠ X = ∠ Z.
Since WX bisects ∠ YXZ and WZ bisects ∠ YZX,
Therefore, on /H17005XWZ,
= m2 + mn + mn + n2
= m2 + 2mn + n2
= (m2 + n2) + (2mn)
Since m2 + n2 = 12 and mn = 9,
13 . B. Adding any two of three consecutive positive integers greater than 1 will always be greater than the other
integer. Therefore, II is true. The others cannot be determined because they depend on values and/or the order of
x, y, and z.
14 . C. Area of the square = 2
1 × product of diagonals
dd
dd d
1 because in a square
== _i
Therefore, d2
d = 12 feet
X
Y
W
Z
Part II: Practice-Review-Analyze-Practice
15 . A. Let 5x = first angle, 2x = second angle, and 5x - 2x = 3x = third angle. Since the sum of the angles in any
xxx
x
x
x
++ =
Therefore, x
x
x
The smallest angle will have a measure of 36°.
= (-5, 2)
17. A. Let n = number of nickels, 3n = number of dimes, and 3n - 3 = number of quarters. Since 25 coins are in the
collection,
n = 4 nickels = $0.20
3n = 12 dimes = $1.20
3n - 3 = 9 quarters = $2.25
Therefore, the total value of the collection is $0.20 + $1.20 + $2.25 = $3.65
18 . E. Since arc YXZ is a semicircle, its measure is 180°.
arc XZ = arc YXZ - arc YWX
Since an inscribed angle = 2
1 (intercepted arc),
1 (arc XZ)
19 . C. Since mn 10= , mn = 100, and the possible values for m and n would be
Since none of these combinations yields m + n = 50, choice C is correct.
Practice Test 2
Practice Test 2
20. E. To find the y-intercepts, set x = 0 and solve for y.
y
y
y
y
y
y
_i
Section 5: Critical Reading
Sentence Completion
1. A. The informative phrase here is "mistakes we made last week or last year." These mistakes we understand by
looking back, by "hindsight." None of the other choices fits the rest of the sentence so well.
poets." The right word must be the opposite of universal, since the word "not" precedes it. The best choice is
"unique," different from all others. With "not," this is equivalent to "something everyone possesses."
3. E. The phrase "less is more" is not a "hope," a "question" (that would be "is less more?"), an "enigma" (riddle),
or an "image." It is a "paradox,"an apparent self-contradiction, since less should be less, not more.
4. C. Choices A, C, and D would seem to fit the first blank, but the second noun, which describes something the
senator did that the president ignored, could be only B or C, and B has already been eliminated. Both of the nouns
in C make very good sense in this context.
5. E. Since the action is described as stupid and indifferent, it cannot be something that has helped our resources, so
we are left with two possible answers: "wasted" C or "squandered" E. The second blank must be a word meaning
"ability; capacity" E makes good sense, but "failure" C does not.
6. A. Reports of "freewheeling" corporate spending are unlikely to be "favorable" or "encouraging," but choices A
and B fit well, and C is a possibility. The "despite" at the beginning of the sentence tells us that the reports are not
true, and the missing adverb should be very different from "freewheeling." Both B "unfairly" and C "secretly"
contradict the "despite," but A makes good sense. The reports must be "lurid," that is, sensational or startling, and
the adverb is "equitably," that is, fairly or even-handedly.
7. A. The first phrase tells us the crime will be described by an "understatement." Choices B, C, D, and E all call a
crime a crime, but "peccadillo" suggests that stealing 4 million dollars is insignificant, a minor fault, a petty
crime. This is "understatement."
8. E. The second adjective modifies "countries that have no savings at all," so it cannot be any of the words
meaning rich (A, B, C, and D). The correct choice is "indigent," that is, poor. Although A, C, or E might have fit
the first blank, choice E makes the most sense overall.
9. A. The sentence tells us that Pierce refused to read about positions different from his own. First, you need a noun
to describe a quality of a man like this, and all of the answers except E are possibilities. The second blank calls for
a word to go with "to travel" that will also fit this parochial, insular, bigoted, or narrow-minded man. The right
answer must mean something like "failure" or refusal. Either A or E will do, but only A has the first word right.
Short Reading Passages
10 . C. See lines 15-17. A is irrelevant to this passage, as is E. B is an overstatement, and the executions of Luddites
were based on "machine breaking," not peaceful protesting, D.
11. A. See lines 4-7. There is no information within the paragraph to support the other answers, even if they might
be historically accurate.
Part II: Practice-Review-Analyze-Practice
12 . B. Pauli proposed the idea of an invisible particle to explain why energy seemed to be missing when atoms lost
electrons and changed into other kinds of atoms. There is no information in the passage to support the connection
between neutrinos and radiation (choices A and E). D is vague, and C is simply incorrect.
13 . D. Pauli said he had done a "terrible thing" by suggesting the existence of a particle that couldn't be detected, and
Fermi's paper was rejected because an invisible particle was too speculative. A is too general, nor is there any
evidence that Pauli and Fermi either did or did not attempt to find a neutrino, C. The hunt for neutrinos was made
possible by the nuclear reactors, rather than the other way around, E. B is not indicated anywhere in the paragraph.
14 . C. The author faults the government's power of eminent domain in urban renewal. Lines 4-8 make it clear that
the author favors relying on market forces, that is, having developers acquire property only when there is demand
for it. B is most likely contrary to the author's beliefs (lines 10-12), and A and E are not suggested by the
passage. Although the author might agree with D, nothing in the passage indicates it.
15 . B. "Gentrified," from "gentry," which means the upper or ruling class, is a word that has been created to describe
the rebuilding of deteriorating areas accompanied by the influx of affluent residents who displace the poor.
Because lines 10-11 refer to the poorer residents being "priced out" and therefore forced to move, C and E are
not good choices. A and D are also not suggested by the context.
16 . D. In Passage 1, the author cites the extensive and unchecked demolition of properties (lines 10-12) as a major
problem. In Passage 2, the author mentions that urban renewal has improved and now focuses on, among other
things, "selective" demolition (line 23). The author of Passage 2 does not indicate that government involvement
has been a major problem, A, or that most projects have failed, C. Neither author refers to B, and neither author
makes or implies a judgment on E.
Long Reading Passages
17. E. The first paragraph cites our using the words "shrinks playfully" and, in the second sentence, as a means of
suggesting a criticism of modern psychotherapy. The third sentence asks (and suggests an affirmative answer)
whether "witchdoctoring" might have "at least marginal value."
18 . A. The allusion to Sahlin's "stone-age economics" is intended to suggest the possibility of a stone-age psychiatry
that may have some relevance to the modern world. The idea is advanced tentatively, in the form of a question
that concludes the paragraph.
19 . D. The passage never makes outrageous claims for tribal therapy, but it does assert that it "may be more effective
in the treatment of their own people," with the added qualification "especially when it comes to mental and
emotional disorders."
20. B. The second paragraph concludes with a reference to the "condition of expectant faith,"Freud's words of
praise for tribal healers who create this feeling that can have a "great therapeutic effect." That is, a patient who
expects to be healed is more likely to recover.
21. B. The third paragraph describes the much greater range of ills that traditional shamans would treat, including a
frozen foot. Modern psychotherapists can be expected to deal with the mental afflictions of choices A, C, D, and
E, but not with the broken arm.
22. D. The word "marked" is an adjective here, meaning conspicuous or obvious.
23. A. The phrase is best paraphrased by between body and mind. Although "psychic" as a noun can mean a person
sensitive to forces beyond the physical world, here it means that which is of the mind.
24. C. As it is used in this context, "psychosomatic" means originating in the mind and carries no suggestion of
imaginary or unreal.
25. A. Freud, the second paragraph says, believed in the importance of the "condition of expectant faith" based on
the patient's trust in the therapist's skill. Torrey, in the fourth paragraph, insists upon the importance of the
"cultural bond" uniting the therapist and the client. The best answer here is choice A.
26. C. "To take issue with" is to argue, disagree, contest with. Torrey is disagreeing with assumed superiority of the
Western scientist.
Practice Test 2
Practice Test 2
27. E. The author deliberately uses the words "mumbo-jumbo, charlatans, psychotics," and "eye of newt" not
because he agrees with them but because he realizes that many of his readers approach this subject with these
prejudices. The phrase "shaman's method" does not have the pejorative denotation or connotations of the four
other choices.
28. C. The passage is suggesting that we study tribal lore before we dismiss it because it may have uses even in
modern Western society. The passage is not so unrealistic as to assert that tribal medicine is superior to Western,
and its chief purpose is not to criticize the West.
Section 6: Mathematics
1. E. First add the number in the parentheses, then square the total.
2. D. Each term in the sequence must be divisible by 4, and 438 is not divisible by 4.
3. C. If y + 2 is positive, it means that y + 2 must be greater than zero. That is,
y + 2 > 0
y > -2
4. C. If the plumber works for 6 consecutive hours, the charge is $45 for the first hour plus $20 for each of the five
additional hours:
5. C. Notice how drawing some line segments can assist you in finding the necessary lengths.
The perimeter is the sum of the lengths of the sides.
6. B. Since a = p + prt,
a p p prt p
a p prt
pt
ap
pt
prt
pt
ap r
-=+ -
Therefore, r pt
ap= -
7. A. Since Rajiv will be y years old x years from now, he is y - x years old now. Therefore, z years from now he
will be y - x + z years old.
Part II: Practice-Review-Analyze-Practice
8. C. An exponent of 2
5 means to take the square root of the number raised to a power of 5.
So, zz 2
9. C. Let x = first number, 2x + 1 = second number, and 3x - 4 = third number. Since the average of the three
numbers is 55,
xx x
Multiplying both sides of the equation by 3,
x
x
x = 28 = first number
2x + 1 = 57 = second number
3x - 4 = 80 = third number
Therefore, the largest number is 80.
10 . C. Triangle DBC is a 30-60-90 triangle, which means that the sides DB, CD, and CB are in the ratio 1: 2: 3,
respectively.
You're given that BC is 23 , which means that the common factor for all three sides is 2. Then side BD is 2 × 1 = 2.
If BD = 2, then AB = x + 2. The area of /H17005ABC is given as 63 . So you can solve as follows:
AB BC
x
x
x
x
x
Area base height##=
hh
h j
h
AD x
x + 2
B
C
Practice Test 2
Practice Test 2
Grid-In Questions
11. Answer: 8
. Multiplying both sides of the equation by the LCD of 5,
xx
xx
x
x
c ^m h
12 . Answer: 14. Since 60% of the students are girls, 40% of the students are boys. Hence,
= 14 boys
13 . Answer: 6
. The average of any three numbers is equal to the sum of the numbers divided by 3.
1++ = + +
The sum = 12
The average of the numbers is
1' == $
14 . Answer: 93.5.
x
17 gallons
5 gallons
miles=
x = 93.5 miles
15 . Answer: 527. The total of the five verbal SAT scores is 2,635. Dividing that total by 5 (the number of scores)
gives 527 as the average.
16 . Answer: 45. Since the sum of the measures of the angles of a quadrilateral is 360 and the ratio of the angle
measures is 3:5:7:9,
The smallest angle is 3x = (3)(15) = 45.
17. Answer: 12
. If Jim works for 2 days, he will complete 6
, or 3
, of the job. If Mike works for 2 days, he will
complete 8
, or 4
, of the job. Together they will complete
7 of the job.+= + =
Part II: Practice-Review-Analyze-Practice
18 . Answer: 50. Since BD is a diagonal of square ABCD,
The area of square BDMN
BD
h
j
19 . Answer: 100. The greatest increase is indicated by the steepest rise in the graph lines, between 1991 and 1992.
But you are looking for the greatest percentage increase, which means the increase as compared to the starting
point. To find percentage increase:
starting point
amount of increase percentage increase=
5 25% increase=
25 100% increase=
40 80% increase=
20. Answer: 264. In /H17005MNP , PM= PN and ∠ PMN = ∠ PNM = 42°. Also, in /H17005MNP ,
Since ∠ MPN is a central angle,
Also, arc MN + arc MQN = 360°
Section 7: Critical Reading
Long Reading Passages
1. C. The passage makes no comment on the skills of the players in the earlier period as opposed to today. The first
paragraph tells us that orchestra conducting is "less than 150 years old" and that it became necessary because
orchestras began to increase in size in the late 1700s.
2. E. The sentence structure suggests that "Apollonian" and "Dionysian" are parallel to "Mendelssohn" and
"Wagner," to "elegant" and "passionate," and to clear and emotional. Although Apollo is the sun god, the best
choice here is "clear" and "elegant."
Car Sales
Sales In Thousands
steepest
rise
Practice Test 2
Practice Test 2
3. C. The third paragraph discusses the difficulties of conducting, citing the conductor's having to "play" upon an
instrument of one hundred musicians, while the singer or orchestral player must deal with only one.
4. E. The author of Passage 1 presents the "ideal modern conductor" as a synthesis of the "elegant" and the
"passionate" schools (lines 35, 26-27).
5. B. The snide parenthesis manages to suggest that music critics are society ladies who are less interested in and
less able to judge musical abilities than are musicians. Like the society women, the critics are more important to
a conductor's success than are a conductor's real musical abilities. The sentence does not imply that critics are
more interested in the players than in the conductor.
6. B. The author compares conductors and politicians, suggesting that both are careerists. They are, like conductors,
conspicuously not original, disciplined, modest, or indifferent to power.
7. D. The phrase is in fact saying that conductors are self-centered, are egoists.
8. C. The passage suggests that in the "musical community"-that is, the community of musicians and music
lovers-music is paramount. In the "music-business community," however, with its cult of personality, music is
not the main concern. Although choices D and E may well be true, the passage does not deal with these issues.
9. D. What the sentence in its roundabout way is really saying is that television, unfortunately, makes it possible for
viewers to see the front of the conductor. In the concert hall, the conductor's back is to the audience, but television
has made it possible for viewers to see every grimace of the conductor. To circumvent is to go around or to avoid,
and "dorsal" means back.
10 . A. The phrase refers to "listen to the music." The author implies that it will be so bad you had much better have
stayed at home.
11. E. At one time or another, the passage mocks or directly attacks conductors, politicians, the public, and the
critics, but it spares the instrumentalists who play in the orchestras.
12 . A. Unlike the author of Passage 1, the author of Passage 2 wants no part of the conductor's personality or feelings to
interfere with what the composer has written. The ideal performance would be "an exact realization of the score."
Since the second author is a composer, whereas the first is a conductor, these preferences are understandable.
13 . D. Both passages use the word "great," but Passage 2 always puts quotation marks around the word. The author
is quoting the word from people like the author of the first passage (and may, in fact, have the first passage
specifically in mind), but "great" in the second passage is said with a sneer. It refers to so-called "great"
conductors whose qualifications have too little to do with music.
14 . B. Both passages assume that a conductor will be male. Since that time, an increasing number of female conductors
have appeared before the public. In addition, a gender-neutral style of writing has become more common.
Section 8: Mathematics
1. A.
. x
percent
of number
is number=
Cross multiplying,
x
x
x
Part II: Practice-Review-Analyze-Practice
2. C. The maximum number of squares 1 inch by 1 inch will be 16.
3. E. Let x = original price. Then
Hence, the book originally cost $9.50.
4. A. Multiply the numerator and denominator by 12 (LCD).
= ++
c
c
m
m
5. D. According to the graph, the tallest "B" (before) bar is county 4.
6. B. Solve this problem by plugging in simple numbers. Start with 1, an odd integer.
= (2) times (2 + 1)
= 6 (not odd)
Now, try 2, an even integer.
= (3) times (4 + 1)
= 15 (an odd integer)
7. C. Since ,AB C40 80E == %% %
Since the measure of a circle is 360%, then
AB AC BC360
=- +=+=
%% %% % %
j
i
$ % %
A
B
C
Practice Test 2
Practice Test 2
8. C. Since two-thirds of the students are boys, 36 243
=^h boys in the class. Out of the 24 boys in the class, three-
fourths of them are under six feet tall, or 24 184
=^h boys under six feet tall.
9. D. Absolute value equations require solving two distinct equations:
x
xx
xx
xx
xx
xx
or
or
or
+= + = -
+-= - +- = - -
== -
== -
== -
10 . D. Since the area of a trapezoid hb b2
12=+$$ ^h , we need to find the altitude, h. Draw altitudes in the figure as
follows:
Since the triangles formed are right triangles, use the Pythagorean theorem, which says
c2 = a2 + b2
h 144 12 inches==
Hence, the area of the trapezoid will be
hb b2
= (6) (78)
= 468 square inches
11. C. Since x is an integer, then x could be a negative, zero, or positive whole number. If you plug in some integers
for x you can see that 3x cannot be a negative number or zero so f(x) could not be 3 or 4. Eliminate choices A and
B. If x is -2, then f(x) could be 4 9
as follows:
x
^h
At this point, select choice C and go on to the next problem. If you try some other integers you'll notice that 5 3
and 9 are not possible values for f(x).
hh
Part II: Practice-Review-Analyze-Practice
12 . A.
y x x
y xx x
y x
y x
y x
+= -+
Taking the reciprical of both sides of the equation,
y x1
13 . D. First, calculate the rates of production per day. Two of the factories each make 100,000/15 = 6,667 hubcaps per
day. The third plant makes 1.3 × 6,667 = 8,667 hubcaps per day. The total production rate is 8,667 + 2(6,667) =
22,001 hubcaps per day. At that rate, it would take 45.5 days to produce a million hubcaps.
14 . B. Solve as follows:
y
y
y
y
y
y
y
y
++ =
+- = -
` ^j h
Anytime you square both sides of an equation you must check for extraneous roots. So check: y = 78
++ = ++
15 . B. Area 2
1 base height##=
A C
B
h
Practice Test 2
Practice Test 2
Since /H17005BCD is a 30-60-90 triangle,
hB C2
h
h
Hence, area of /H17005ABC AC BD2
36 3 square yards
hh
h j
h j
Section 9: Critical Reading
Sentence Completion
1. E. If trucks are the "only" means of transport, then there can be no public transportation, and a word that denotes
this is needed. The best choice is "nonexistent," that is, not in existence.
2. D. The clue in the second part of the sentence describes the stories as often "less than three pages long."
Although any one of the answers could make sense, only "economy" is specifically related to the short length of
the stories.
3. B. For the first blank, each of the first four choices would be suitable, but the second blank requires a verb that
follows from the paternal sympathy with the program. Either B or E is appropriate, but "obligatory" is a better
adjective choice than "habitual."
4. B. The missing word must describe someone who acts in opposition to the "best economic advisors." Choices A,
D, and E all denote a conservative, and choice C is neutral. A "maverick" is a person who acts independently,
deriving from the term for an unbranded, lost calf that any rancher could claim.
5. B. The "but" signals a word that is very different from "conservative" in meaning. Although "liberal" in some
contexts is the opposite of "conservative," that use refers to politics, not clothing, and the best choice here is B
"flamboyant," which means ornate or showy.
6. D. If the protests put the warden at risk, they were probably "vigorous" or "outspoken" and not "tactful,"
"realistic," or "unregarded," although "realistic" might work. "Poaching" is "illegal" but also very "something"
that makes people risk breaking the law. The possibilities here are "profitable" or its synonym "lucrative." The
best choice, then, is D, which has "outspoken protests" and "lucrative pursuit."
7. C. The "Although" signals the possibility of smaller particles being found, so B and C are the best first words.
With the phrase "or are very close to" in the sentence, "have approached" is redundant, whereas "have reached"
makes good sense.
8. C. The blanks must be the opposites or contradictions of "affable" and "articulate," given the "neither" and "nor."
Of the choices, not "morose" and not "reticent" would be the closest to "affable" and "articulate." The adjectives
"sullen," "quiet," or "aggressive" could work but not paired with the words given here.
9. A. If there is a "problem" for Spanish composers, the missing word must be "refused." With B, D, or E, there
would be no problem, and C makes no sense.
10 . A. The two missing adjectives modify "reason" and are defined by "not a change in thinking" and "but a
shortage of money." The choices that most clearly refer to belief and money are "ideological" and "economic."
Part II: Practice-Review-Analyze-Practice
Short Reading Passages
11. A. The Daniel Boone legend is well-known, which suggests that it is cited here as a familiar example. Also, the
sentence is in parentheses-an aside, something that isn't critical to the main idea. It precedes the comments
about Trickster, ruling out C, and it concerns legends, not "coup" stories, D. The paragraph does not address the
idea in E at all, and it is not humorous, B.
12 . B. It is the only statement based directly on information in the passage. See lines 6-10. The other answers here
may or may not be true, but no information in the passage attests to their accuracy.
13 . D. A and B are not suggested by the paragraph, and C is incorrect because the tone of the paragraph is objective,
not critical. The paragraph also does not imply that the South should have won the war, even with its military
advantages, E.
14 . E. The Northern advantages are all long-term, especially food production. Each of the other choices draws a
conclusion beyond any implications in the passage.
15 . C. All the sentences predict a too-rosy future for television, and the similarity between the sentence structure in
lines 5-7 ("If...[then] surely") underscores the idea that these statements are going to turn out to be untrue. The
tone indicates that the passage will be critical of the optimism, given events that followed, and will not simply be
a "recounting of the early days," B, or of television's growing popularity, A. D and E are completely irrelevant to
the passage.
16 . C. They assumed that the images projected by television would be much more powerful than voices on the radio,
which led them to predict that television would profoundly affect people's actions. See lines 5-10. A is incorrect
because they believed that people could change. Line 14 also suggests that they believed happiness was measurable
in some way. Therefore, D is also incorrect. B and E are irrelevant. The pundits of line 2 emphasize the power of
the image, not television's democratic nature or its popularity.
Long Reading Passages
17. A. Since all rain is naturally acidic, the passage suggests that the name is inadequate. Although the paragraph
says that the name may sound "sinister," it does not suggest that acid rain is not a serious problem. Acid rain with
a low pH is a serious problem.
18 . E. Areas downwind of industrial polluters are likely to be affected by acid rain.
19 . A. It can be inferred that an acidic reading of less than pH 2, which is "six to eight times more acidic than vinegar,"
is less than one point lower than the pH of vinegar, since "each integer is 10 times more acidic" than the one before
it. So the vinegar pH would be approximately 2.
20. E. The record itself is not in doubt. What is questionable is if this record for intense pollution is a record anyone
would want to set.
21. E. The pH scale is neutral at 7, more acidic below, and more alkaline above. So pH 11 would be the most
alkaline.
22. C. In the fifth paragraph, the passage points to "natural alkaline rock, like limestone," that "helps to neutralize
acid rain."
23. C. The word "eerily" means strangely or weirdly.
24. B. Irony is a set of circumstances or result that is just the opposite of what might be expected. Here the expected
result was the solution to a pollution problem (the smokestacks), and the result was increased pollution
somewhere else.
25. A. The "silver lining" here was the beneficial effect of the sulfur emissions in fertilizing the soil. The reference
to "cloud" is especially apt in this case.
26. B. The seventh paragraph suggests that the chief opponents in the acid rain debate are the environmentalists who
want the pollution reduced and the industrialists who would probably have to pay the cost of reducing emissions.
Practice Test 2
Practice Test 2
27. D. The passage implies that choices A, B, C, and E would reduce acid rain but does not present reduction of the
use of sulfur fertilizer as an opportunity to stem pollution.
28. D. The rain falls on places far from the source of the pollutants, even crossing international boundaries at times.
Section 1 0: Writing-Multiple Choice
Improving Sentences
1. A. The original is the right version. The two complete sentences are separated by a semicolon, avoiding the run-
on, to be found in B and E. D will not work because "while" introduces a dependent clause, but the semicolon
should introduce a complete sentence. C is not wrong in its punctuation, but it alters the meaning of the original
sentence.
2. D. The original version of this sentence has no errors of grammar, but D is also correct and four words shorter.
The second clause in B is a sentence fragment; it has no main verb. C is wordy, repeating the word "construction."
To avoid the illogical comparison of "construction" and "King Lear," E should read "King Lear's."
3. C. The issue in this sentence is clarity, rather than grammar. All five versions are grammatical, but C makes the
point most clearly. The point is that though the capability has long been known, no one has made use of this
knowledge until very recently ("just"). C correctly subordinates half of the sentence, using "although."
4. B. This sentence has a pronoun ("which") without a specific antecedent. B corrects this by adding the noun
"schedule." Both D and E lack a specific antecedent. What is it that will be "decreased" or "altered"?
5. A. Though the original version is longer than the other choices, it is the only one that keeps the comparison
logical. The unchangeable part of the sentence has "as important as enjoying" so the first part must have an action
parallel to "enjoying." The nouns of B, C, D, and E are not a similar activity.
6. D. The problem of the original sentence is its verbosity. The phrase "of a . . . nature" is always verbose; the
adjective by itself will say the same. The trouble with B is that "trusting" and "trustworthy" have very different
meanings. A trusting person may be trustworthy or devious, and a trustworthy person may be trusting or skeptical.
7. A. The original is the best version. Since the sentence begins with the phrase "A very old plant," the first words
after this introductory phrase should refer to a plant, singular, not to plants such as cornflowers, B. C, D, and E
misplace the modifier by following the initial phrase with "painting" not a "plant."
8. B. Though the original sentence is not wrong, it treats the two clauses as equal. Choice B, by subordinating the
past to the present, establishes a more meaningful relationship between the parts. C shifts from passive to active,
while E uses the present tense to describe action in the past.
9. B. This is a dangling modifier. The sentence seems to say that the essay did the struggling! B eliminates this
problem, clearly associating John with the opening phrase about struggling.
10 . D. This sentence is testing for verbosity. All of the first four choices are grammatical, but D alone avoids the
unnecessary repetition of the word "mountains."
11. D. In the original sentence, and in C, the "they" has no antecedent. Who is "they"? D is more concise than B
(a passive) and E.
12 . E. To be sure the reader does not think the mayor spent so much money on cosmetic surgery, E places the
modifier "after a multi-million dollar face-lift" next to what it modifies, the Champs Elysees. The four other
versions of the sentence place the modifier nearer to Chirac.
13 . A. The sentence is saying "completing...was as satisfying as." The original version is the most concise and the
most clearly parallel of the five choices.
14 . D. Both B and C can be eliminated, since the phrase that begins the sentence must modify the Canadians, not the
city in Florida. The problem with A and E is the idiom "descend into." One can descend into a coal mine or into
hell, but the correct idiom in this context is "descend on."
15 . C. The series here uses two main verbs in the past tense ("stopped," "ran"); the third verb in the series should
also use the past tense.
Part II: Practice-Review-Analyze-Practice
Answer Sheets for Practice Test 3
(Remove These Sheets and Use Them to Write Your Essay and Mark Your Answers)
Section 1
Begin your essay on this page and continue on the next page if necessary. Do not write outside the essay boxes provided.
Section 2 Section 3 Section 4 Section 5
Section 5 (continued)
.. .
.. .
.. .
.. .
A EDCB
A EDCB
A EDCB
A EDCB
A EDCB
10 A EDCB
A EDCB
A EDCB
A EDCB
A EDCB
A EDCB
A EDCB
A EDCB
A EDCB
A EDCB
A EDCB
A EDCB
A EDCB
A EDCB
A EDCB
A EDCB
A EDCB
A EDCB
A EDCB
A EDCB
A EDCB
A EDCB
A EDCB
A EDCB
A EDCB
A EDCB
A EDCB
A EDCB
A EDCB
A EDCB
A EDCB
A EDCB
A EDCB
A EDCB
A EDCB
A EDCB
A EDCB
A EDCB
A EDCB
A EDCB
A EDCB
A EDCB
A EDCB
A EDCB
A EDCB
A EDCB
A EDCB
A EDCB
A EDCB
A EDCB
A EDCB
A EDCB
A EDCB
A EDCB
A EDCB
A EDCB
A EDCB
A EDCB
A EDCB
A EDCB
A EDCB
A EDCB
A EDCB
35 A EDCB
A EDCB
A EDCB
A EDCB
A EDCB
36 A EDCB
A EDCB
A EDCB
A EDCB
A EDCB
A EDCB
A EDCB
A EDCB
A EDCB
A EDCB
A EDCB
A EDCB
A EDCB
A EDCB
A EDCB
A EDCB
A EDCB
A EDCB
A EDCB
A EDCB
A EDCB
Section 5 (continued)
Section 6 Section 7
A EDCB
A EDCB
A EDCB
A EDCB
A EDCB
A EDCB
A EDCB
A EDCB
A EDCB
A EDCB
A EDCB
A EDCB
A EDCB
A EDCB
A EDCB
A EDCB
A EDCB
A EDCB
A EDCB
A EDCB
A EDCB
A EDCB
A EDCB
A EDCB
A EDCB
A EDCB
A EDCB
A EDCB
A EDCB
A EDCB
A EDCB
A EDCB
A EDCB
A EDCB
A EDCB
A EDCB
A EDCB
A EDCB
A EDCB
A EDCB
A EDCB
A EDCB
A EDCB
.. .
.. .
.. .
.. .
.. .
.. .
Section 8 Section 9
Section 9 (continued)
.. .
.. .
.. .
.. .
.. .
.. .
.. .
.. .
.. .
.. .
A EDCB
A EDCB
A EDCB
A EDCB
A EDCB
10 A EDCB
A EDCB
A EDCB
A EDCB
A EDCB
A EDCB
A EDCB
A EDCB
A EDCB
A EDCB
A EDCB
A EDCB
A EDCB
A EDCB
A EDCB
A EDCB
A EDCB
A EDCB
A EDCB
A EDCB
Section 10
A EDCB
A EDCB
A EDCB
A EDCB
A EDCB
A EDCB
A EDCB
A EDCB
A EDCB
A EDCB
A EDCB
A EDCB
A EDCB
A EDCB
A EDCB
Practice Test 3
Section 1: Writing-Essay
Time: 25 Minutes
1 Essay Question
You have 25 minutes to plan and write an essay on the topic below. DO NOT WRITE ON ANOTHER TOPIC. AN ESSAY
ON ANOTHER TOPIC WILL NOT BE SCORED.
The essay is intended to give you the chance to show your writing skills. Be sure to express your ideas on the topic
clearly and effectively. The quality of your writing is much more important than the quantity, but to cover the topic ade-
quately, you may want to write more than one paragraph. Be specific.
Your essay must be written on the two lined pages provided. You will not be given any additional paper. If you keep
your handwriting to a reasonable size, write on every line, and avoid wide margins, you should have enough space to
complete your essay.
Directions: Read the following paragraph and assignment carefully. Then prepare and write a persuasive essay. Be sure
to support your reasons with specific examples that will make your essay more effective.
"We learn, as we say, by 'trial and error.' Why do we always say that? Why not 'trial and rightness' or 'trial and
triumph'? The old phrase puts it that way because that is, in real life, the way it is done."
-Lewis Thomas
Assignment: Thomas suggests that learning is a result of making mistakes rather than doing things correctly. Do you
agree or disagree with Thomas? Using an example or examples from your reading or your personal observation, write
an essay to support your position.
THE PROCTOR WILL ANNOUNCE WHEN 25 MINUTES HA VE PASSED. AT THAT TIME, YOU MUST STOP
WRITING. IF YOU FINISH YOUR ESSAY BEFORE 25 MINUTES HA VE PASSED, YOU MAY NOT GO ON TO
ANY OTHER SECTION OF THE EXAM. THE PROCTOR WILL ANNOUNCE WHEN TO START THE NEXT
SECTION.
Part II: Practice-Review-Analyze-Practice
Section 2: Mathematics
Time: 25 Minutes
20 Questions
Directions: Solve each problem in this section by using the information given and your own mathematical calcula-
tions, insights, and problem-solving skills. Then select the one correct answer of the five choices given and mark the
corresponding circle on your answer sheet. Use the available space on the page for your scratch work.
Notes
1. All numbers used are real numbers.
2. Calculators can be used.
3. Some problems may be accompanied by figures or diagrams. These figures are drawn as accurately as possible
EXCEPT when it is stated in a specific problem that a figure is not drawn to scale. The figures and diagrams are
meant to provide information useful in solving the problem or problems. Unless otherwise stated, all figures and
diagrams lie in a plane.
Data That Can Be Used for Reference
rectangle
A = lw
Area
triangle
circle
rectangular solid
V = lwh
Volume
right circular cylinder
Pythagorean Relationship
Special T riangles
A circle is composed of 360°
A straight angle measures 180°
The sum of the angles of a triangle is 180°
w
l
h
b
r
M
r
h
l
h
w
a2 + b2 = c 2
C B
A
c
a
b
x
x
1. If 3m + n = 7, then 9m + 3n =
A. 9
B. 3
2. If it takes 18 minutes to fill 3
of a container, how
long will it take to fill the rest of the container at
the same rate?
A. 6 minutes
B. 9 minutes
C. 12 minutes
D. 27 minutes
E. 36 minutes
3. In the figure above, what is the number of degrees
in the sum of m + n?
4. If x is between 0 and 1, which of the following
statements must be true?
I. x2 > 1
II. x2 > 0
III. x2 > x
A. I only
B. II only
C. III only
D. I and II only
E. II and III only
Practice Test 3
Practice Test 3
GO ON TO THE NEXT PAGE
5. Tom is just 4 years older than Fran. The total of
their ages is 24. What is the equation for finding
Fran's age?
A. x + 4x = 24
B. x + 4 = 24
C. 4x + 2x = 24
D. x + (x + 4) = 24
E. 4x + 1 = 24
6. If a plane travels 840 miles in 1 2
hours, how many
hours will it take for the plane to travel 3,500
miles at the same speed?
7. If the seventh row was shown in the diagram
above, it could not have any
A. even numbers.
B. odd numbers.
C. perfect numbers.
D. prime numbers.
E. perfect cube numbers.
8. If x = 4
3 and y = 7
4 , then yx
yx
A. -1
B. 7
C. - 37
D. 7
Row 1
Row 6
Row 5
Row 4
Row 3
Row 2
Part II: Practice-Review-Analyze-Practice
9. In a class of 40 students, there are 24 girls. What
percent of the class are boys?
10 . In /H17005XYZ above, points M, N, and P are midpoints.
If XY = 10, YZ = 15, and XZ = 17, what is the
perimeter of /H17005MNP?
Note: Figure not drawn to scale.
11. On the circle above with center C, CD = AB,
AB = 24, and CD = 5. What is the radius of the
circle?
E. 7
12 . George scored an average of 80% on three tests.
What score must he get on the fourth test to bring
his average to 85%?
AB D
C
X
Y
M N
ZP
Practice Test 3
Practice Test 3
GO ON TO THE NEXT PAGE
13 . If x(y - z) = t, then y =
A. xt z+cm
B. x
tz
C. t + x - z
D. x
tz+^h
E. t - x + z
14 . In the figure above, X and Y are the centers of the
two circles. If the area of the larger circle is 144π,
what is the area of the smaller circle?
E. It cannot be determined from the information
given.
15 . If m * n = n
mn 1
+- , then 2 * 3 =
A. 9
B. 3
C. 1
E. 2
16 . If b
a
d
c= and a, b, c, and d are positive integers,
then which of the following is true?
A. b
a cd=
B. ac = bd
C. a + d = b + c
D. b
d ac=
E. d
a
b
c=
X ZYW
Part II: Practice-Review-Analyze-Practice
17. Which of the following is the number of solutions
in the system of equations shown above?
A. More than three
B. Exactly three
C. Exactly two
D. Exactly one
E. None
18 . If y varies directly as x and if x =18 when y = 12,
what is y when x = 20?
19 . If the diameter of circle R is 30% of the diameter
of circle S, the area of circle R is what percent of
the area of circle S?
A. 9%
20. The midpoint of XY is B. The coordinates of X are
(-4, 3), and the coordinates of B are (5, -2). What
are the coordinates of Y?
A. ,2
B. (1, 1)
C. (6, -7)
D. (14, -3)
E. (14, -7)
Practice Test 3
Practice Test 3
IF YOU FINISH BEFORE TIME IS CALLED, CHECK YOUR WORK ON THIS
SECTION ONLY . DO NOT WORK ON ANY OTHER SECTION IN THE TEST. STOP
1. The melting of Antarctic ice affects ocean
currents, and the sunlight's penetration of the
water and the growth of microorganisms are also
affected.
A. currents, and the sunlight's penetration of the
water and the growth of microorganisms are
also affected.
B. currents; also affected are the sunlight's
penetration of the water and the growth of
microorganisms.
C. currents, and it also affects the sunlight's
penetration of the water and the growth of
microorganisms.
D. currents, the sunlight's penetration of the
water and the growth of microorganisms.
E. currents, with the sunlight's penetration of
the water and the growth of microorganisms
also being affected.
2. Coffee drinking may protect against cancer of the
colon, which is surprising since coffee drinking
increases the risk of heart attack.
A. which is surprising since coffee drinking
increases
B. and this is surprising since coffee drinking
increases
C. surprising, since coffee drinking increases
D. and this surprises us because coffee drinking
increases
E. which surprises since coffee drinking
increases
Part II: Practice-Review-Analyze-Practice
Section 3: Writing-Multiple Choice
Time: 25 Minutes
36 Questions
In this section, choose the best answer for each question and blacken the corresponding space on the answer sheet.
Directions: The following questions test correctness and effective expression. In selecting the answer, pay attention to
grammar, diction, sentence structure, and punctuation. In the following questions, part or all of each sentence is under-
lined. The A answer repeats the underlined portion of the original sentence, while the next four offer alternatives.
Choose the answer that best expresses the meaning of the original sentence, and at the same time is grammatically
correct and stylistically superior. The correct choice should be clear, unambiguous, and concise.
EXAMPLE:
The forecaster predicted rain and the sky was clear.
A. rain and the sky was clear.
B. rain but the sky was clear.
C. rain the sky was clear.
D. rain, but the sky was clear.
E. rain being as the sky was clear.
The correct answer is D.
3. The excavations at Ceren reveal the prosperity of
the rural Mayans, the staples of their diet, and the
architecture of their homes.
A. the prosperity of the rural Mayans, the
staples of their diet, and
B. the prosperity of the rural Mayan; the staples
of their diets; and
C. the prosperity of the rural Mayans, and the
staples of their diet, and
D. the rural Mayans, the prosperity and the diet
they ate, as well as
E. how prosperous the rural Mayans were, what
their diet was, and
4. Human cells grown in a test tube can reproduce as
many as sixty times then they die from old age.
A. times then they die
B. times but then they die
C. times and then they die
D. times; then they die
E. times; before dying
5. In the official portrait of Richard III, it shows an
attractive and healthy man, and does not present
the deformed demon of Shakespeare's play.
A. In the official portrait of Richard III, it shows
an attractive and healthy man, and does not
present
B. In the official portrait of Richard III, an
attractive, healthy man is shown; it does not
present
C. The official portrait of Richard III shows an
attractive and healthy man, not
D. The official portrait of Richard III shows a
man who is attractive and healthy, and does
not present
E. Richard III, in the official portrait, is a man
who is attractive and healthy, and he is not
6. George Eliot was an ardent and knowledgeable
lover of music, and she hadlittle skill in composing
melodious verse.
A. George Eliot was an ardent and
knowledgeable lover of music, and she had
B. George Eliot loved music ardently and
knowledgeably, and she
C. George Eliot was ardent and knowledgeable
in her love of music, and she had
D. George Eliot was an ardent, knowledgeable
music lover, having
E. Although George Eliot was an ardent,
knowledgeable lover of music, she had
7. Nestled in the mountains of southwestern
Colorado, the extinction of the town of Silverton
is imminent with the closing of its silver mine.
A. the extinction of the town of Silverton is
imminent
B. the extinction of Silverton as a town is
imminent
C. the imminent extinction of the town of
Silverton is likely
D. the town of Silverton faces imminent
extinction
E. the town of Silverton will become extinct
imminently
Practice Test 3
Practice Test 3
GO ON TO THE NEXT PAGE
8. Strange as it now seems, Japan and Italy once
agreed to limit car imports because Japan
fears competition from Italian cars. No Error.
9. In July, 1991, there were darkness at noon
in Mexico City, as the moon passed between
the sun and the Earth. No Error.
10 . The advertisement for Neil Simon's play Rumors
features three sets of mechanical false teeth
who appear to be talking to each other. No Error.
11. You can grow a number of spring-flowering
bulbs indoors, but if the plants are to blossom,
one must carefully control the light. No Error.
12 . Despite lagging productivity by its work force,
the Cuban government has continued to provide
a first-rate health-care program. No Error.
13 . Nowadays most medical authorities agree that
huge doses of just about any substance is
likely to be dangerous. No Error.
14 . As a resulting of overgrazing, firewood cutting,
and increased cultivation, the Sahara Desert has
steadily grown larger in this decade. No Error.
15 . To safeguard wildlife, the state of Florida will
line its highways with high fencing, forcing
panthers to scoot beneath the roads through
specially designed animal underpasses. No Error.
16 . Hypnotism, chewing-gum, and
nicotine-releasing skin patches are probably the
most used method to break the
cigarette smoking habit. No Error.
Part II: Practice-Review-Analyze-Practice
Directions: The following sentences may contain one error of grammar, usage, diction, or idiom. No sentence will
contain more than one error, and some have no error. If there is an error, it will be underlined with a letter. Sections of
the sentence that are not underlined cannot be changed. In selecting your answer, observe the requirements of standard
written English. If there is an error, choose the one underlined part that must be changed to correct the sentence. If there
is no error, choose E.
EXAMPLE:
The film tell the story of a cavalry captain and his wife who try to rebuild their lives after the Civil War.
No Error.
The correct answer is A.
BA CD
E
A
B
C DE
A
BC
D E
AB
CD E
A B
CD E
AB
CD
E
A
BC
DE
A
B
CD E
A
B C
D
E
A B
C
DE
17. The decline in the industrial average was much
smaller compared to the 1929 decline because
the Dow index stands with a much higher level
today. No Error.
18 . Missing the forehand volley, a relative easy shot,
Morea fell behind early in the match, and
he never recovered. No Error.
19 . In an area of the Pacific Ring of Fire of
special interest to volcanologists lie the western
Siberian Kamchatka Peninsula. No Error.
20. Bears, mountain lions, beavers, deer, squirrels,
and coyotes inhabit Sequoia Park, and they may
be dangerous to campers. No Error.
21. No Latin American matador can become famous
without he succeeds in Spain where bullfighting
was invented. No Error.
22. The discovery of the existence of a fifth force
could have enormous impact on theoretical
physicists who are trying to develop a unified
theory to explain the interactions of matter.
No Error.
23. When it is five o'clock in New York, it is
only three in Texas, and it will be two o'clock
in California or Oregon. No Error.
24. New Englanders seem to believe that us Texans
talk oddly, but we think they are the ones who
have strange ways of speaking. No Error.
25. To encourage better reading skills, teachers in the
public schools now requisite students to submit
weekly diaries listing the books, magazines, and
newspapers they have read. No Error.
26. The best examples of plays that can be produced
with a minimum of expense for settings and
costumes must be Wilder's Our Town. No Error.
Practice Test 3
Practice Test 3
GO ON TO THE NEXT PAGE
A
BC
D
E
AB
C
DE
AB
CD
E
A
B C
DE
A B
C
DE
AB
C
D
E
A
BC
DE
A
B C
D
A
B
C
DE
AB
C
DE
E
Questions 27-32 are based on the following passage.
(1) I'm sure that many people wish that this statement
would work for them. (2) I'm sure that they would like to
have all the best things handed them on a silver plate.
(3) But this is not how life works. (4) My father was not
handed all of his possessions that he has now. (5) He
worked hard to get them. (6) We didn't have them handed
to us free of charge, and I am glad it went this way.
(7) People will respect others who work hard for a liv-
ing versus people who get all of their success handed or
given to them. (8) Hard work builds self-esteem. (9) Who
are you if you do not even appreciate yourself? (10) People
who never work lose the opportunity of learning about
themselves, and do not know what self esteem is. (11) And
they are not as happy as people who do know.
(12) So even if the money in this world could be yours
free, it would be better to not take it. (13) In the long run
you would be happier without it. (14) You might not be
rich but you would have your self-respect and the respect
of others. (15) And without self respect you will not be
happy.
27. Which of the following is the best version of
sentence 3 (reproduced below)?
But this is not how life works.
A. Leave it as it is.
B. But life does not work this way.
C. And this is not how life works.
D. Life doesn't work like that.
E. Since life is not like this.
28. Which of the following is the best combined
version of sentences 4 and 5 (reproduced below)?
My father was not handed all of the
possessions that he has now. He worked
hard to get them.
A. My father was not handed all of the
possessions he has now, but he worked
hard for them.
B. My father was not handed, but worked hard
for all of the possessions that he now has.
C. My father was not handed, but worked hard
for all his possessions.
D. My father worked hard to obtain all his
possessions.
E. My father worked hard for all the
possessions that he has now.
29. Which of the following best describes the function
of paragraphs one and two of this passage?
A. The first paragraph makes an assertion which
the second paragraph explains.
B. Paragraph one makes an assertion which
paragraph two contradicts.
C. Paragraph one raises a question which is
answered in paragraph two.
D. Paragraph one offers an abstract idea which
is supported by concrete examples in
paragraph two.
E. Paragraph one presents generalizations
which are supported by references to
personal experience in the second paragraph.
Part II: Practice-Review-Analyze-Practice
Directions: The following passages are early drafts of student essays. Some parts of them need to be revised.
Read the selections carefully and answer the questions that follow. There will be questions about sentence structure,
diction, and usage in individual sentences or parts of sentences. Other questions will deal with the whole essay or
paragraphs, and ask you to decide about organization, development, and appropriate language. Choose the answer
that follows the requirements of standard written English, and most effectively expresses the intended meanings.
30. Which of the following is the best version of
sentence 7 (reproduced below)?
People will respect others who work hard for
a living versus people who get all of their
success handed or given to them.
A. Leave it as it is.
B. People will respect others that work hard for
a living more than those who succeed
because it was handed to them.
C. People respect others working hard for a
living more than those who get success
handed or given to them.
D. People will respect hard work versus those
who get success handed to them.
E. People respect those who work hard for a
living more than those whose success is
unearned.
31. The final paragraph of the passage differs from the
first and second because it
A. argues that unearned riches are not to be
desired.
B. asks rhetorical questions.
C. is entirely directly addressed to the reader.
D. introduces a new topic for discussion.
E. uses examples from personal experience.
32. The writer's purpose in the last paragraph is
A. to summarize his position.
B. to summarize objections to his point of view.
C. to propose a solution to the question raised in
the first two paragraphs
D. to introduce a final example.
E. to allow his reader to make up his own mind.
Questions 33-36 are based on the following passage.
(1) I had not looked forward to going to my cousin's
wedding in Idaho. (2) I did not want to go because it was
on the last weekend of the summer, and I would rather
have spent it with my friends at home. (3) I never had
wanted to visit Idaho, even though my cousins lived
there. (4) My family and I only had stand-by airline tick-
ets, and we missed two flights, so we ended up waiting at
the airport for three hours before we even left. (5) Finally
having arrived there after nine at night, the weather was
cold and rainy. (6) It made me feel like this would be the
worst weekend of my life.
(7) When we woke up the next morning at the motel, I
looked out the window, and it looked dismal, the sky was
gray, and you could see small patches of rain falling.
(8) My family and I ate a light breakfast and left for the
wedding. (9) It was a half hour drive to the wedding.
(10) My cousin was getting married in a park. (11) By the
time we got there it was starting to clear up. (12) The wed-
ding was outdoors in the woods, and just when the bride
came in, the sun came out. (13) You could feel every-
body's spirits lift.
(14) After that everything seemed to go right. (15) The
food at the wedding party was great. (16) There was a
good band. (17) The friends of my cousin who were my
age were fun. (18) When the time came to go home the
next day, I was sorry to leave. (19) Next year I may go to
college in Idaho.
33. Which of the following is the best version of the
underlined part of sentence 5 (reproduced below)?
Finally having arrived there after nine at
night, the weather was cold and rainy.
A. Leave it as it is.
B. Having finally arrived there after nine at
night, the weather
C. Arrived there finally, after nine at night,
the weather
D. Not getting there until after nine at night,
the weather
E. When we finally got there, after nine at
night, the weather
34. Which of the following is the best version of
sentence 6 (reproduced below)?
It made me feel like this would be the worst
weekend of my life.
A. Leave it as it is.
B. I felt like this would be the worst weekend of
my life.
C. I thought that this would be the worst
weekend of my life.
D. It felt like this would be the worst weekend
of my life.
E. It seemed like this would be the worst
weekend of my life.
Practice Test 3
Practice Test 3
GO ON TO THE NEXT PAGE
35. Which of the following is the best version of the
underlined portion of sentence 7 (reproduced
below)?
When we woke up the next morning at the
motel, I looked out the window, and it looked
dismal, the sky was gray, and you could see
small patches of rain falling.
A. Leave it as it is.
B. looked dismal; the sky was gray, and you
could see
C. looked dismal, the sky was gray; and you
could see
D. looked dismal, and the sky was gray, and you
could see
E. looked dismal. The sky was gray, you could
see
36. All of the following strategies are used by the
writer of the passage EXCEPT
A. frequent reliance on figurative language.
B. chronological arrangement of events.
C. relating the first and last sentence of the
passage.
D. use of a first person speaker.
E. use of details of weather to convey mood.
Part II: Practice-Review-Analyze-Practice
IF YOU FINISH BEFORE TIME IS CALLED, CHECK YOUR WORK ON THIS
SECTION ONLY . DO NOT WORK ON ANY OTHER SECTION IN THE TEST. STOP
1. As the boat drifted closer and closer to the rocks,
the people on the beach became increasingly
A. cowardly
B. intrepid
C. apprehensive
D. eager
E. receptive
2. If only a native can understand the dialect of this
region, even the best foreign linguist will be
A. mistaken
B. baffled
C. misrepresented
D. addressed
E. translated
3. Carlson described the changes he had made in the
the alterations were made with the writer's prior
A. editing . . . permission
B. revising . . . prohibition
C. expurgation . . . warrant
D. corrections . . . disapproval
E. decimation . . . connivance
4. The thousand-mile trek across the wilderness was
capacity to adapt.
A. proportion
B. immaturity
C. openness
D. weakness
E. resilience
Practice Test 3
Practice Test 3
GO ON TO THE NEXT PAGE
Section 4: Critical Reading
Time: 25 Minutes
28 Questions
In this section, choose the best answer for each question and blacken the corresponding space on the answer sheet.
Directions: Each blank in the following sentences indicates that something has been omitted. Consider the lettered
words beneath the sentence and choose the word or set of words that best fits the whole sentence.
EXAMPLE:
A. impoverished
B. successful
C. populous
D. developed
E. militant
The correct answer is C.
5. A change in fashion to a very thin look is not just
dangerous eating disorders.
A. victim . . . peril
B. prank . . . challenge
C. whim . . . undertaking
D. fad . . . hazard
E. idea . . . response
bones and teeth in the jewelry and made their
disapproval clear by refusing to buy any of the
A. enthralled . . . unusual
B. fascinated . . . remarkable
C. horrified . . . ghoulish
D. repulsed . . . amiable
E. hypnotized . . . grisly
7. In the unsuccessful conference, none of the
audience, but Dr. Schultz's address reached the
A. aggrandized . . . pinnacle
B. elicited . . . nadir
C. attributed . . . record
D. raised . . . ebb
E. induced . . . medley
8. In a landscape so calm and beautiful, it was hard
A. untoward
B. temperate
C. halcyon
D. seemly
E. refined
Part II: Practice-Review-Analyze-Practice
Questions 9-10 are based on the following passage.
As a child in Victorian England, Florence
Nightingale used to sew up the wounds her sister
had inflicted upon her dolls and put splints on her
dog's injured paws. Nightingale was a member of a
wealthy and socially prominent family and, as a
female, barred from the formal study of the sci-
ences. Nevertheless, as she grew up she pored over
the reports of medical commissions and hospitals.
She visited hospitals in England and throughout
Europe. In the end, she convinced her conservative
family to allow her to become the superintendent of
a charitable nursing home in London. Then, in
1854, during the Crimean War, she took a team of
nurses to Scutari in Turkey. The hospital death rate
fell from 42 to two percent.
9. The passage suggests that Florence Nightingale
became a nurse because
A. nursing was a highly respected profession in
the early 19th century.
B. her parents were wealthy enough to sponsor
her studies and recognized her strong interest
in medicine.
C. her religious feelings could find no other
appropriate outlet.
D. she was dissatisfied with the usual role of a
woman in upper middle-class Victorian
society.
E. the conventions of the time would not allow
her to become a veterinarian.
10 . The primary function of the last sentence of the
paragraph is to
A. act as a transition to a new idea that will be
presented in the next paragraph.
B. suggest the importance of Florence
Nightingale's nurses in the Crimean War.
C. refute the 19th century idea that women were
incapable of becoming physicians.
D. dramatize the terrible conditions in military
hospitals during the 19th century.
E. provide a factual detail to support the main
idea of the paragraph.
Questions 11-12 are based on the following passage.
Early 19th century American steam engines
were inferior to late 18th century British steam en-
gines. An example of American technology lagging
behind? Not according to historian George Basalla.
Rather, the American engines-more dangerous
and less fuel-efficient-were the result of specific
choices made by American engineers. At the time,
America was rich in resources but poor in skills, so
high fuel consumption didn't matter as much as
the ease of construction and maintenance of high-
pressure operation. (High-pressure engines could
also go faster, an important consideration for a larger
landmass.) According to Basalla, what appear today
to be design flaws in the American engine should be
seen instead as the result of a designer working
within the boundaries of a given time and place.
11. The main topic of the paragraph is the
A. superiority of British steam engines.
B. reasons American technology was poor
compared to British technology.
C. great importance of fuel efficiency in
England.
D. reasons for the choices of American steam
engine designers.
E. importance of high-pressure operation in
American steam engines.
12 . The function of the question in lines 3-4 is to
A. suggest an explanation that proves to be the
wrong one.
B. show that there are no easy answers to
technological problems.
C. show the absurdity of the statement in the
first sentence.
D. question the debt that American technology
owed to British technology.
E. introduce the idea that natural resources are a
key factor.
Practice Test 3
Practice Test 3
GO ON TO THE NEXT PAGE
Directions: Questions follow each of the passages below. Using only the stated or implied information in each passage
and in its introduction, if any, answer the questions.
Questions 13-14 are based on the following passage.
Even oil industry leaders have been forced to
pay attention to global warming in Alaska since
their exploration season on the North Slope has
dropped from 200 to 100 days in only three
decades. The reason for this is what scientists call
the "feedback processes." When the region's abun-
dant snow and ice melt away, more areas of water
and earth are exposed to the sun. Those darker sur-
faces absorb much higher amounts of solar radia-
tion, and, as they expand in size, they take in more
heat. Basically, this means that the warming builds
upon itself; the more surfaces that are exposed to
the sun, the faster global warming occurs.
13 . The effect of the phrase "Even oil industry
leaders" in the first sentence is to show that
A. global warming has economic consequences
that are not fully understood by the
layperson.
B. people in states other than Alaska have
reasons to be concerned about the pace of
global warming.
C. productivity decreases in warmer climates.
D. the problem in Alaska must be serious if
those not usually sensitive to environmental
problems are taking notice.
E. the price of gasoline may be directly related
to global warming.
14 . Which of the following best describes "feedback
processes" (line 6)?
A. recurring cycles of solar radiation
B. a vicious circle of warming causing more
warming
C. melting snow and ice absorbing solar
radiation
D. exposure to the sun causing increased heat
absorption
E. lighter surfaces becoming darker surfaces
Questions 15-21 are based on the following passage.
The rabies virus, which can cause disease in any
mammal, is spread by the bite of an infected ani-
mal. It is lethal once symptoms develop but can be
blocked by timely administration of a series of vac-
cine injections soon after an attack. The vaccine,
which today may be given in an arm rather than the
abdomen, is derived from a killed rabies virus. The
inactivated virus prods the immune system to
destroy active virus, especially when the injections
are combined with application of rabies-specific
antibodies to the wound area [see "Rabies" by
Martin M. Kaplan and Hilary Koprowski; Scientific
American, January 1980].
Unfortunately, in any year thousands of people
who are probably uninfected undergo treatment be-
cause they do not know whether the animal that bit
them had rabies. These high numbers are disturbing
because therapy is costly and because vaccination of
any kind carries a risk of side effects. (The expense
is a major reason veterinarians and others who are
very likely to encounter rabid animals are generally
the only people immunized prophylactically.)
Even more distressing, most people who die of
rabies are lost simply because they live in impover-
ished nations. Those who are attacked by infected
animals often lack access to therapy or cannot pay
for it.
Routine immunization of the animal species
most likely to transmit the virus to humans would
be a more efficient, health-conscious way to save
human lives and, not incidentally, to spare animals
from suffering. To an extent, such inoculation is
already a reality. In many wealthy nations, includ-
ing the U.S., periodic injection of pet dogs with
vaccine has all but stopped canine transmission to
humans. Disease caused by cats can be limited in
the same way.
In developing countries, however, obtaining vet-
erinary care can be extremely difficult, which is
one reason why dogs continue to account for at
least 90 percent of all human deaths from rabies.
Another problem is that even where pet rabies is
under good control, wild animals-not being very
amenable to collection and carting to the local
veterinarian-pose a threat.
For these unattended groups, distribution of
vaccine-laced baits for animals to eat in the field is
showing particular promise. This approach is
already halting the spread of rabies by foxes in
many parts of western Europe and Canada. More
preliminary work suggests rabies in other species
can be controlled as well.
Indeed, a vaccine-filled bait for raccoons is now
being tested in the U.S. If the results are good, the
bait method might finally check an epidemic of
raccoon rabies that has been spreading up the East
Coast from Florida since the 1950s. If baiting can
be perfected for distribution to dogs in developing
countries, then the goal of sharply curtailing human
cases worldwide would finally seem feasible.
This encouraging state of affairs stands in
marked contrast to the situation in the 1960s, when
research into vaccinating wild animals started in
earnest. By then immunization had already reduced
Part II: Practice-Review-Analyze-Practice
the incidence of dog rabies in the U.S. But infec-
tion by foxes, skunks, raccoons, and bats-the
other significant rabies reservoirs in this country-
was a continuing concern. Compared with dogs,
those groups have less direct contact with humans,
but collectively they are more abundant.
To control rabies in free-ranging animals, health
officials in the 1950s had depended on thinning
populations that harbored the offending virus. They
tried gassing of dens, poisoning, trapping, and
shooting, among other tactics. The workers rea-
soned that destruction of enough animals would so
reduce a population that any infected individuals
would die without tangling with another animal.
When diseased creatures disappeared, only healthy
ones would remain. Yet the strategy halted the
spread of the malady in target groups only some of
the time.
15 . All of the following could be infected with rabies
EXCEPT
A. raccoons.
B. cats.
C. humans.
D. skunks.
E. carrion birds.
16 . The passage suggests that a human infected with
rabies by a dog bite who did nothing for a long
period of time would
A. be unable to spread the disease to another
human.
B. probably never be aware of having been
infected.
C. die.
D. be cured by a vaccine injection.
E. be cured by applying rabies-specific
antibodies in the area of the bite.
17. The passage suggests that throughout the world
the largest cause of human exposure to the rabies
virus is from
A. dogs that have not been immunized.
B. dogs that have been immunized.
C. cats that have not been immunized.
D. cats that have been immunized.
E. wild animals such as raccoons, foxes, or
skunks.
18 . It can be inferred that the number of fatalities from
rabies in the United States is small because
I. most dogs have been immunized by
injections.
II. people exposed to the virus have access to
immediate treatment.
III. the rabies virus is rare in the wild-animal
populations of the United States.
A. I only
B. I and II only
C. I and III only
D. II and III only
E. I, II, and III
19 . As it is used in line 60, the word "feasible" means
A. unpredictable.
B. inexpensive.
C. hygienic.
D. practicable.
E. endurable.
20. At present, humans infected with rabies virus can
be treated by
I. a vaccine injection in the abdomen.
II. a vaccine injection in the arm.
III. an oral recombinant vaccine.
A. I only
B. II only
C. I and II only
D. II and III only
E. I, II, and III
21. Vaccine-laced baits would be most effective in
preventing rabies among
I. wild-animal populations susceptible to
rabies.
II. domestic animals in areas where injections
are impossible.
III. wild or domestic animals already infected
with disease.
A. III only
B. I and II only
C. I and III only
D. II and III only
E. I, II, and III
Practice Test 3
Practice Test 3
GO ON TO THE NEXT PAGE
Questions 22-28 are based on the following passage.
The following passage is from the autobiography of a
young black woman who was among the first women to
attend the New England prep school, St. Paul's.
Outside my personal circle, the school that term
seemed to buzz, buzz. Class officers, it seemed,
were often called upon to talk. We talked day and
evening, in club activities and rehearsals, in the
houses, in the hallways, in our rooms, in the bath-
rooms, and in meetings after meetings. We gos-
siped. We criticized. We whined. We analyzed. We
talked trash. We talked race relations, spiritual life,
male-female relations, teacher-student trust. We
talked confidentially. We broke confidences and
talked about the results. We talked discipline and
community. We talked Watergate and social-fabric
stuff.
I did not follow the Watergate hearings. I did not
rush to the third floor of the Schoolhouse for the
ten-thirty New York Timesdelivery to read about it;
nor did I crowd around the common-room TV to
watch the proceedings. I could not bother to worry
about which rich and powerful white people had
hoodwinked which other rich and powerful white
people. It seemed of a piece with their obsession
with fairness.
I was unprepared, therefore, to dine at the
Rectory with Mr. Archibald Cox, the St. Paul's
alumnus whom President Nixon had fired when, as
U.S. Special Prosecutor, Mr. Cox began to reveal
the Watergate break-in and cover-up. Seated
around him were the Rector and a handful of fac-
ulty members and student leaders. I said as little as
possible in order to conceal my ignorance. Mr. Cox
was acute. He referred to the Watergate players and
the major events in witty shorthand. I couldn't
quite follow, so I ate and smiled and made periodic
conversation noises.
Then he wanted to hear about St. Paul's School.
There had been so many changes since his time. I
found myself saying, in answer to his question, or
the Rector's signal, that I was more aware of being
black at St. Paul's than I was of being a girl. I used
a clever phrase that I stole from somewhere and
hoped he hadn't already heard: "Actually, we're
still more like . . . a boys' school with girls in it. But
black people's concerns-diversifying the curricu-
lum and that sort of thing-the truth is that that's
more important to me than whether the boys have
the better locker room."
Pompous it was, and I knew it, but better to be
pompous in the company of educated and well-off
white folk, better even to be stone wrong, than to
have no opinion at all.
Mr. Cox thought a moment. God forbid he
should go for the cross-examination. I added more.
"Black concerns here at school may look different,
but are not really, from the concerns that my par-
ents have taught me all my life at home." I put that
one in just so he'd know that I had a family. "And
believe me, Sir, my mama and daddy did not put
President Nixon into the White House. We didn't
do that!"
Mr. Cox wrinkled his lean, Yankee face into a
mischievous smile. His voice whispered mock con-
spiracy. He leaned toward me. "Do you know who
Nixon hates worst of all?"
I shook my head no. I had no idea.
"Our kind of people."
My ears felt hot. I wanted to jump on the table. I
wanted go back home and forget that I'd ever
come. I wanted to take him to West Philly, and drop
him off at the corner of Fifty-second and Locust,
outside Foo-Foo's steak emporium, right by the
drug dealers, and leave him there without a map or
a bow tie. Then tell me about our kind of people.
The Rector gave me a look that urged caution.
I fixed my face. "What kind of people are those?" I
asked.
"Why, the educated Northeastern establish-
ment," he said. The Rector smiled as if relieved.
22. The speaker's lack of interest in the Watergate
hearings is chiefly due to her
A. feeling alienated from the others at her
school.
B. concern with issues of gender rather than
politics.
C. belief that it was just another rich white
person's problem.
D. eagerness to be accepted by her peers at
school.
E. fear that it would separate her from her
family's values.
23. In line 21, the phrase "of a piece" means
A. consistent with.
B. a small part of.
C. indifferent to.
D. partly to blame for.
E. inconsistent with.
Part II: Practice-Review-Analyze-Practice
24. The word "acute" in line 31 means
A. sharp-pointed.
B. shrewd.
C. critical.
D. angular.
E. severe.
25. The speaker in line 52 uses the phrase "cross-
examination" because
A. she wishes to amuse the others in the
discussion.
B. she feels she has committed a serious crime.
C. she prefers to be wrong than to have no
opinion at all.
D. Archibald Cox is a lawyer.
E. she has misunderstood Cox's questions.
26. When the speaker responds with the thoughts
expressed in lines 66-72 ("My ears felt hot . . .
people"), she is responding especially to what
single word in the dialogue before?
A. "Nixon" (line 63)
B. "hates" (line 63)
C. "worst" (line 63)
D. "Our" (line 65)
E. "people" (line 65)
27. It can be inferred from the passage that the
"Rector smiled as if relieved" (line77) because he
A. has been afraid the speaker would say
something shocking.
B. disapproves of political arguments.
C. has not understood what the speaker has
been thinking.
D. is too conventional to imagine a violent
difference in opinion or in background.
E. is amused by Archibald Cox's witty remark.
28. The passage as a whole is characterized by the
speaker's
A. lack of feeling and self-discipline.
B. candor and self-awareness.
C. bitterness and sense of unfairness.
D. hypocrisy and self-deception.
E. naiveté and charm.
Practice Test 3
Practice Test 3
IF YOU FINISH BEFORE TIME IS CALLED, CHECK YOUR WORK ON THIS
SECTION ONLY . DO NOT WORK ON ANY OTHER SECTION IN THE TEST. STOP
Section 5: Mathematics
Time: 25 Minutes
20 Questions
Directions: This section is composed of two types of questions. Use the 25 minutes allotted to answer both question
types. For questions 1-10, select the one correct answer of the five choices given and mark the corresponding circle on
your answer sheet. Your scratch work should be done on any available space in the section.
Notes
1. All numbers used are real numbers.
2. Calculators can be used.
3. Some problems may be accompanied by figures or diagrams. These figures are drawn as accurately as possible
EXCEPT when it is stated in a specific problem that a figure is not drawn to scale. The figures and diagrams are
meant to provide information useful in solving the problem or problems. Unless otherwise stated, all figures and
diagrams lie in a plane.
Data That Can Be Used for Reference
rectangle
A = lw
Area
triangle
circle
rectangular solid
V = lwh
Volume
right circular cylinder
Pythagorean Relationship
Special T riangles
A circle is composed of 360°
A straight angle measures 180°
The sum of the angles of a triangle is 180°
w
l
h
b
r
M
r
h
l
h
w
a2 + b2 = c 2
C B
A
c
a
b
x
x
Part II: Practice-Review-Analyze-Practice
1. What is the sales tax on $132.95 if the tax rate
is 7%?
2. What is the value of 112 + 1-15 + 10?
A. 3
B. 2
C. 0
D. -2
E. -3
3. If D is the set of odd integers and E is the set of
even integers, then what is the intersection of sets
D and E?
A. {0}
D. { }
E. The set of all integers
4. What is 30% of 18
D. 6
E. 3
Practice Test 3
Practice Test 3
GO ON TO THE NEXT PAGE
5. Bob is older than Jane, but he is younger than Jim.
If Bob's age is b, Jane's age is c, and Jim's age is
d, then which of the following is true?
A. c < b < d
B. b < c < d
C. b < d < c
D. c < d < b
E. d < c < b
6. What is the slope of line l in the figure?
A. 3
B. 5
C. 0
D. 3
E. 5
7. The angles of a quadrilateral are in the ratio of
2: 3: 4: 6. What is the degree measure of its
largest angle?
8. Today is Lucy's fourteenth birthday. Last year she
was three years older than twice Charlie's age at
that time. Using C for Charlie's age now, which of
the following can be used to determine Charlie's
age now?
B. 14 - 3 = 2C
C. 13 - 3 = 2C
D. 13 + 3 = 2C
y
x
l
Part II: Practice-Review-Analyze-Practice
9. What are the x-intercepts for the parabola
y = x2 + 4x - 12?
E. The parabola does not have any x-intercepts.
10 . If the average of two numbers is y and one of the
numbers is equal to z, then the other number is
equal to
A. 2z - y
B.
yz
+_i
C. z - y
D. 2y - z
E. y - 2z
Practice Test 3
Practice Test 3
GO ON TO THE NEXT PAGE
Part II: Practice-Review-Analyze-Practice
Directions for Student-Produced Response Questions (Grid-ins): Questions 11-20 require you to solve the
problem and enter your answer by carefully marking the circles on the special grid. Examples of the appropriate way
to mark the grid follow.
Answer: 3.7 Answer: 2
Answer: 1 2
Do not grid in mixed numbers in the form of mixed numbers. Always change mixed numbers to improper fractions or
decimals.
Change to 1.5 or Change to 2
.. .
.. .
.. .
Fraction bar
.. .
Decimal point
Practice Test 3
Practice Test 3
GO ON TO THE NEXT PAGE
Answer: 123
Space permitting, answers can start in any column. Each grid-in answer that follows is correct.
Note: Circles must be filled in correctly to receive credit. Mark only one circle in each column. No credit will be given
if more than one circle in a column is marked. Example:
Answer: 258 (no credit)
.. .
.. .
.. .
Part II: Practice-Review-Analyze-Practice
Answer: 9
Accuracy of decimals: Always enter the most accurate decimal value that the grid will accommodate. For example: An
answer such as .8888 . . . can be gridded as .888 or .889. Gridding this value as .8, .88, or .89 is considered inaccurate
and therefore not acceptable. The acceptable grid-ins of 9
are:
Be sure to write your answers in the boxes at the top of the circles before doing your gridding. Although writing out the
answers above the columns is not required, it is very important to ensure accuracy. Even though some problems may
have more than one correct answer, grid only one answer. Grid-in questions contain no negative answers.
.. .
.. .
.. .
11. If 12a = 5b, then b
a =
12 . At a particular university, the ratio of males to
females is 5 to 3. What percent of the students are
female? (Disregard the % sign when gridding your
answer.)
13 . How many different outfits can be obtained from 5
shirts, 3 pairs of slacks, and 3 sports jackets?
14 . If m 36-= , then m =
Friendly Fruit Stand Price List
cantaloupes 59¢ each or 2 for $1
oranges 39¢ each or 3 for $1
15 . Mr. and Mrs. Adams are planning to attend a
company picnic and need to make a fruit salad for
the occasion. Their recipe calls for 5 apples, 10
bananas, 4 cantaloupes, and 5 oranges. Based on
the prices given above, what is the least amount
they could spend at the fruit stand to buy all the
fruit they need for their salad? (Disregard the $
sign when gridding your answer.)
16 . Ben's average for seven math exams is 89%. What
percent must he score on the next exam to raise his
average to 90%? (Disregard the % sign when
gridding your answer.)
17. What is the area of a square whose diagonal has a
length of 12?
18 . The chart above shows the prices of products A
and B from 1980 to 1990. Using the chart, in what
year will product A cost 40¢ more than product B?
Practice Test 3
Practice Test 3
GO ON TO THE NEXT PAGE
19 . What is the height (h) of the trapezoid if its area
20. What is the length in centimeters of a chord that is
12 centimeters from the center of a circle whose
radius is 20 centimeters?
Part II: Practice-Review-Analyze-Practice
IF YOU FINISH BEFORE TIME IS CALLED, CHECK YOUR WORK ON THIS
SECTION ONLY . DO NOT WORK ON ANY OTHER SECTION IN THE TEST. STOP
1. By banning cameras from the courtroom, the
most important civil-rights trial.
A. belied
B. denied
C. defied
D. afforded
E. disowned
2. The grocer reluctantly admitted that, despite his
A. exceptional
B. sporadic
C. commonplace
D. redundant
E. hackneyed
3. The work that once takes two men one week might
well, one year later, take the same two men three
completion."
A. urges . . . grows easier
B. explains . . . becomes familiar
C. states . . . decreases
D. forbids . . . increases
E. asserts . . . expands
4. Although they loudly cheered the news of the
would be the last year of government support.
A. sorrow . . . tempered
B. happiness . . . augmented
C. gladness . . . enervated
D. euphoria . . . moderated
E. buoyancy . . . debilitated
Practice Test 3
Practice Test 3
GO ON TO THE NEXT PAGE
Section 6: Critical Reading
Time: 25 Minutes
28 Questions
In this section, choose the best answer for each question and blacken the corresponding space on the answer sheet.
Directions: Each blank in the following sentences indicates that something has been omitted. Consider the lettered
words beneath the sentence and choose the word or set of words that best fits the whole sentence.
EXAMPLE:
continent.
A. impoverished
B. successful
C. populous
D. developed
E. militant
The correct answer is C.
5. The local conversation was nothing if not
than four words long.
A. ambiguous
B. timely
C. vague
D. terse
E. cordial
positions in the face of economic realities, a
the government to function.
A. sensible . . . compromise
B. dogmatic . . . consensus
C. incisive . . . schism
D. irrational . . . dichotomy
E. reasoned . . . division
7. The universal Victorian preference of the more
conventional morality of Charlotte Brontë to that
of her sister is indicative of the nineteenth century
A. impolitic
B. genteel
C. discordant
D. iconoclastic
E. individualistic
8. Though the first thirty pages are interesting and
lively, chapter after chapter about obscure
chapter.
A. unmanageable . . . pace
B. tedious . . . verve
C. repetitive . . . torpor
D. dull . . . lethargy
E. boring . . . challenge
9. Some of the dangerous dishes on the menu are
or other spices and are as mild as most American
restaurant food.
A. bland
B. palatable
C. torrid
D. insipid
E. piquant
10 . As a young man, he regarded France as
he considered visiting any place outside of
A. hostile . . . irritating
B. perfect . . . jocund
C. irksome . . . drab
D. Edenic . . . perplexing
E. ideal . . . painful
Part II: Practice-Review-Analyze-Practice
Questions 11-12 are based on the following passage.
At many times in our planet's history, north has
become south and south has become north.
Paleogeologists have discovered this phenomenon
by investigating rocks. When rocks are being
formed from magmas, atoms within their crystals
respond to the earth's magnetic field by "pointing"
toward the magnetic north pole. By age dating the
rocks and noting their magnetic alignment, scien-
tists can determine where on earth the north pole
was located at that time because as the rocks solid-
ified, they trapped that information within them.
The study of ancient lava flows has revealed that at
certain periods in history magnetic north was directly
opposite its present location. In fact, it has been
determined that magnetic reversal has occurred on
average every 500,000 years.
11. "Magnetic reversal" refers to
A. the atoms in rock crystals pointed toward the
magnetic north pole.
B. north becoming south and south becoming
north.
C. the reversal of direction in ancient lava
flows.
D. a reversal of the direction of convection
currents in the earth's outer core.
E. a disturbance in the regular 500,000-year
cycle of the magnetic field.
12 . According to the paragraph, which of the
following was crucial to the discovery of magnetic
reversal?
A. change in direction of lava flows
B. extinction of certain species 500,000 years
ago
C. the rapid change from "normal" to
"reversed" polarity
D. solidification of rocks formed from magma
E. reversal in the direction of convection
currents 500,000 years ago
Questions 13-16 are based on the following passages.
Passage 1
The poet Emily Dickinson was an eccentric, al-
most reclusive woman who never married. In the
town of Amherst, Massachusetts, where she lived,
people knew she could write verse, but of what real
use was that, except for writing a condolence note
or a compliment to accompany a gift. During her
lifetime, her writing was treated as not very signif-
icant. Of course, there wasn't much of it, at least
that people knew about. Only a few of her many
poems were published while she was alive. Now, in
our own time, she is one of America's most cele-
brated poets. In some ways, Emily Dickinson's life
is a variation on the Cinderella story. She was
transformed from a rather drab spinster to a fasci-
nating woman-not by a fairy godmother but by
the poetry she wrote.
Passage 2
The ideas in Emily Dickinson's poems are
provocative, and she is skillful with metaphors,
rhythm, and euphony. But it is Dickinson's atten-
tion to the individual word that distinguishes her
style. From extant manuscripts it is obvious that
she weighed each word of her poems and was
meticulous in choosing the right one. In some man-
uscripts she would write down nine or ten different
words for the same idea so that she could study
which one would best suit her purpose in a poem.
One reason her poems are so economical is that she
respected the importance of every word she chose.
13 . The author of Passage 1 emphasizes which of the
following about Emily Dickinson?
A. the contrast between her quiet life and her
talent
B. her inability to be taken seriously as a writer
during her lifetime
C. the isolated life she led
D. her reputation as a poet today
E. the psychological motivations for her poetry
Practice Test 3
Practice Test 3
GO ON TO THE NEXT PAGE
Directions: Questions follow each of the passages below. Using only the stated or implied information in each passage
and in its introduction, if any, answer the questions.
14 . In Passage 1, line 2, the word "reclusive" most
nearly means
A. snobbish.
B. ill-natured.
C. uninteresting.
D. solitary.
E. unconventional.
15 . The author of Passage 2 is most impressed by
Emily Dickinson's
A. provocative ideas.
B. ability to choose vivid imagery.
C. precision with language.
D. diligence in revising her work.
E. skill with poetic meters.
16 . Which of the following best describes the attitudes
of the authors towards Emily Dickinson?
A. The author of Passage 1 feels her life is more
interesting than her poetry, while the
opposite is true for the author of Passage 2.
B. Both authors consider her an important poet.
C. Both authors express surprise that a sheltered
woman could write such great poetry.
D. The author of Passage 1 feels Dickinson's
life was pathetic, while the author of Passage
2 does not.
E. The author of Passage 1 is more interested in
the ideas in Dickinson's poems than is the
author of Passage 2.
Questions 17-28 are based on the following passage.
Bilingual ballots have never enjoyed much public
support because the public has never known much
about their origin and rationale. For instance, it is of-
ten assumed that any non-English speaker is entitled
to vote in his or her native tongue. The reality is that
this right applies only to linguistic minorities who
have historically faced discrimination at the polls-
Hispanics, Asians, and Native Americans-and only
in areas where they meet strict requirements. A lan-
guage group must represent more than 5 percent of
the local population and have below-average rates of
voter turnout and English literacy. Moreover, the
cost of assisting non-English-speaking voters is
quite modest. San Francisco officials have estimated
that the annual expense of trilingual English-
Spanish-Chinese ballots comes to less than three
cents per household. In 1984, a federal survey of
eighty-three "covered" jurisdictions found that it
cost them a grand total of $388,000, or 7.6 percent of
election expenses, to provide bilingual ballots. Hardly
an exorbitant price to safeguard what the Supreme
Court has called a "fundamental right because it is
preservative of all rights."
The trend toward bilingual ballots originated in
the V oting Rights Act of 1965. This law suspended
literacy requirements for voting in southern states
where they had been systematically used to dis-
franchise African-Americans. A related provision,
sponsored by Senator Robert F. Kennedy, prohib-
ited such tests elsewhere for voters who had com-
pleted the sixth grade on U.S. soil in a school
whose "predominant classroom language was other
than English." In other words, native-born U.S. cit-
izens could no longer be prevented from voting
simply because they had grown up in a non-
English-speaking environment. Puerto Ricans were
the main beneficiaries of this section, particularly
in New York, where a 1921 amendment to the state
constitution (aimed principally at Yiddish-speaking
Jews) had denied the franchise to anyone unable to
read English.
Federal courts soon went further. Banning
English literacy tests was a hollow gesture, they
reasoned, if formerly excluded voters still faced a
language barrier at the polls. Accordingly, they
mandated bilingual election materials for Puerto
Rican voters in Philadelphia, Chicago, and New
York. "It is simply fundamental," wrote one judge,
"that voting instructions and ballots, in addition to
any other material which forms part of the official
communication to registered voters prior to an
election, must be in Spanish as well as in English,
if the vote of Spanish-speaking citizens is not to be
seriously impaired."
Bilingual voting, like bilingual education, was
designed to compensate for decades of inequality, a
goal that could not be achieved through strictly
"equal" treatment. Simply prohibiting the English
literacy test, or ending the segregation of Mexican
and Chinese American students, was insufficient to
restore rights that linguistic minorities had lost
through no fault of their own. For such groups, affir-
mative measures were needed to guarantee equal
opportunity. Clearly, this approach can lead to
anomalies, as when naturalized citizens of "Spanish
origin" are entitled to bilingual ballots but their
Portuguese- or French-speaking neighbors are not.
Congressional critics of the expanded V oting Rights
Act have argued that its effect is "to mandate an
'unequal protection of the laws,'" privileging some
minority voters over others from non-English-
speaking backgrounds-namely, that it favors non-
white immigrants and indigenous minorities over
white Euro-ethnics.
Part II: Practice-Review-Analyze-Practice
Under current law an individual's need for a
bilingual ballot does not enter into the equation.
Perhaps it should. Why encourage immigrants to
become U.S. citizens and then limit their ability to
participate in our political system? Why not make
every effort to eliminate language barriers to vot-
ing? It is true that most applicants for naturalization
must pass an English literacy test (except for those
aged fifty or older who have been legal U.S. resi-
dents for at least twenty years). But the level of pro-
ficiency required is quite low. In 1982, an average
year, the Immigration and Naturalization Service
turned down only twenty-nine out of 201,507 peti-
tions for citizenship because of inability to speak,
read, or write the English language. The literacy
skills required to decipher voter registration notices
or complex ballot propositions are normally the last
to be acquired in a second language.
17. It can be inferred from the passage that objections
have been made to the use of bilingual ballots on
the grounds that
I. they cost too much taxpayer money.
II. any non-English speaker can demand a
bilingual ballot.
III. any Spanish-speaking voter can demand a
bilingual ballot.
A. I only
B. I and II only
C. I and III only
D. II and III only
E. I, II, and III
18 . Which of the following non-English-speaking
groups could qualify for a bilingual ballot in an
American election at the present time?
A. an Italian-speaking group making up 6
percent of the local population
B. a Samoan-speaking group making up 2
percent of the local population
C. a Portuguese-speaking group with above-
average rates of English literacy
D. a Korean-speaking group making up 12
percent of the local population
E. a Spanish-speaking group with above-
average rates of voter turnout
19 . In the first paragraph, the concluding phrase,
"fundamental right because it is preservative of
all rights," refers to the fact that
A. laws are necessary to preserve order and
justice in any society.
B. the courts must be the final arbiter of what is
and what is not permitted.
C. by voting, citizens can guarantee that all their
other rights are not lost.
D. the rights of one class or group must be
preserved for all classes or groups.
E. the freedom of the citizenry is more
important than the expenditure of a small
sum of money.
20. Under the V oting Rights Act of 1965, a native-born,
Spanish-speaking American citizen who did not
read English would
A. not be permitted to vote under any
circumstances.
B. not be permitted to vote if he or she had
completed six grades in any school.
C. be permitted to vote under any
circumstances.
D. be permitted to vote if he or she had completed
six grades in a Spanish-speaking school in the
United States.
E. be permitted to vote if he or she passed a
literacy test.
21. The second paragraph suggests that, before 1965,
there were laws designed to keep all of the
following from voting EXCEPT
A. native-born Hispanics.
B. Irish Catholics.
C. African-Americans.
D. Yiddish-speaking Jews.
E. foreign-language speakers unable to speak
English.
22. The word "franchise" in line 40 means
A. ownership.
B. marketing privilege.
C. the right to vote.
D. corporate rights.
E. a team that represents a city.
Practice Test 3
Practice Test 3
GO ON TO THE NEXT PAGE
23. In line 43, the phrase "a hollow gesture" can be
best interpreted to mean
A. a useless action.
B. a resounding success.
C. an empty boast.
D. a sacred motion.
E. a foolish joke.
24. Which of the following statements could reasonably
be used to argue against the belief that all the laws
supporting bilingual voting should be repealed
because they discriminate against white immigrants
from Europe?
I. Since many native English speakers have
trouble understanding the complex language
of ballots, non-English speakers are not at a
serious disadvantage.
II. Though the laws may be imperfect, it is
better to spare a large number of other voters
from discrimination.
III. Elimination of bilingual voting would
decrease the incidence of election fraud.
A. I only
B. II only
C. III only
D. I and II only
E. I, II, and III
25. Bilingual voting equality could not be achieved by
strictly equal treatment of all foreign-language
speakers because
A. some minorities had been subject to unequal
treatment for many years.
B. the complexity of Asian languages is greater
than that of European languages.
C. the costs of printing languages such as
Korean or Chinese are higher than those for
printing Spanish.
D. some minorities control more of the wealth
than others.
E. under any circumstances, equal treatment is
impossible because all minorities are
different.
26. Which of the following citizens would probably
have the most difficulty in obtaining a bilingual
ballot in his or her native language?
A. a Hispanic immigrant from Argentina
B. a white immigrant from Spain
C. a white immigrant from Greece
D. a non-white immigrant from Taiwan
E. a Hispanic immigrant from El Salvador
27. The effect of the final paragraph of the passage is
to suggest that
I. the literacy test required of naturalized
citizens is an inadequate test of the literacy
required of a voter.
II. the V oting Rights Act of 1965 is inadequate
and additional laws should be enacted to
enable all voters to vote.
III. the availability of a bilingual ballot should be
determined chiefly by the voters' need for
language assistance.
A. III only
B. I and II only
C. I and III only
D. II and III only
E. I, II, and III
28. From this passage, the reader can infer that the
author's attitude toward the "English Only"
movement, a group urging the elimination of
bilingual schools and ballots, is one of
A. enthusiastic approval.
B. guarded approval.
C. approval in theory, but not in practice.
D. guarded disapproval.
E. strong disapproval.
Part II: Practice-Review-Analyze-Practice
IF YOU FINISH BEFORE TIME IS CALLED, CHECK YOUR WORK ON THIS
SECTION ONLY . DO NOT WORK ON ANY OTHER SECTION IN THE TEST. STOP
Section 7: Mathematics
Time: 20 Minutes
15 Questions
Directions: Solve each problem in this section by using the information given and your own mathematical calcula-
tions, insights, and problem-solving skills. Then select the one correct answer of the five choices given and mark the
corresponding circle on your answer sheet. Use the available space on the page for your scratch work.
Notes
1. All numbers used are real numbers.
2. Calculators can be used.
3. Some problems may be accompanied by figures or diagrams. These figures are drawn as accurately as possible
EXCEPT when it is stated in a specific problem that a figure is not drawn to scale. The figures and diagrams are
meant to provide information useful in solving the problem or problems. Unless otherwise stated, all figures and
diagrams lie in a plane.
Data That Can Be Used for Reference
rectangle
A = lw
Area
triangle
circle
rectangular solid
V = lwh
Volume
right circular cylinder
Pythagorean Relationship
Special T riangles
A circle is composed of 360°
A straight angle measures 180°
The sum of the angles of a triangle is 180°
w
l
h
b
r
M
r
h
l
h
w
a2 + b2 = c 2
C B
A
c
a
b
x
x
Practice Test 3
Practice Test 3
GO ON TO THE NEXT PAGE
1. If x3 = 6, then x - 1 =
A. 1
B. 2
C. 2
D. 3
2. What is the reciprocal of .
C. 3
D. 5
E. 3
3. Harmon's new sports car averages 35 miles per
each gallon of gasoline. Assuming that Harmon is
able to maintain his average miles per gallon, how
far can he drive on 12 gallons of gas?
11 miles
B. 42 miles
C. 350 miles
D. 420 miles
E. 700 miles
what is the measure of ∠ A?
CDA
B
Part II: Practice-Review-Analyze-Practice
5. Teachers will be assigned special camp duty one
day of the week during a seven-day camping trip.
If all the days of the week (Monday through
Sunday) are tossed into a cap and each teacher
chooses one day of the week, what is the
probability that the first teacher will randomly
select a weekday (Monday through Friday)?
A. 7
B. 7
C. 5
D. 7
E. 2
6. According to the bar graph above, Reynolds's
average score exceeds Doe's average score by how
many points?
7. Given a positive even integer y, which of the
following cannot be evenly divisible by y?
A. y - 2
B. y + 2
C. 2y + 2
D. 3y
JacksonFirth Black Doe Frank Hart Reynolds
WOMEN'S BASKETBALL
Scoring Leader's Averages
Practice Test 3
Practice Test 3
GO ON TO THE NEXT PAGE
8. What is the total surface area in square meters of a
rectangular solid whose length is 7 meters, width
is 6 meters, and depth is 3 meters?
9. The first five numbers in a sequence are 3, 7, 15,
31, and 63. What is the next number in the
sequence?
10 . Maria plans to make sandwiches for a picnic. She
has three types of bread from which to choose
(rye, sourdough, and white), four types of meat
from which to choose (salami, bologna, ham, and
pastrami), and three types of cheese from which to
choose (Swiss, cheddar, and jack). If Maria will
use only one type of bread, one type of meat, and
one type of cheese on each sandwich, how many
different kinds of sandwiches can Maria make?
A. 3
B. 4
Part II: Practice-Review-Analyze-Practice
11. In Figure 1, a square piece of paper is folded along
dotted line AB so that X is on top of Y and W is on
top of Z (Figure 2). The paper is then folded again
so that B is on top of A and WZ is on top of XY
(Figure 3). A small triangle is cut out of the folded
paper as shown in Figure 3. If the paper is unfolded,
which of the following could be the result?
A.
B.
C.
D.
E.
12 . A girl runs k miles in n hours. How many miles
will she run in x hours at the same rate?
A. knx
B. nk
C. nkx
D. kx
E. xkn
13 . A circle whose center is the origin passes through
the point P (-3, 4). What is the length of the radius
of the circle?
A. 1
B. 5
C. 7
W XAZ Y
B
W
X
A Y
Z
B
XAY
ZB
Figure 1 Figure 2 Figure 3
W
Practice Test 3
Practice Test 3
GO ON TO THE NEXT PAGE
Note: Figure not drawn to scale.
14 . If the diagonal of a rectangle is 16, then what is its
area in square units?
E. It cannot be determined from the
information given.
15 . If a = 1 + 5-x and b = 1 + 5x, which of the
following is an expression for a in terms of b?
A. b
B. b - 1
C. b 1
D. b
b
E. 1 - b
Part II: Practice-Review-Analyze-Practice
IF YOU FINISH BEFORE TIME IS CALLED, CHECK YOUR WORK ON THIS
SECTION ONLY . DO NOT WORK ON ANY OTHER SECTION IN THE TEST. STOP
Questions 1-13 are based on the following two
passages.
The following are critical commentaries by two well-
known American film reviewers on the 1960s film
The Graduate.
Passage 1
The Graduate is a director's picture because
even its mistakes are the proofs of a personal style.
Style is more an attitude toward things than the
things themselves. It can be a raised eyebrow or a
nervous smile or a pair of shrugged shoulders. It
can even be an averted glance. By playing down
some of the more offensive qualities of the book,
Nichols expresses his own attitude toward the
material. The main trouble with the book is its
reduction of the world to the ridiculous scale of an
overgrown and outdated Holden Caulfield. Charles
Webb's Benjamin Braddock expresses himself
with a monosyllabic smugness that becomes mad-
deningly self indulgent as the book unravels into
slapstick passion. He is superior to his pathetic par-
ents and adults generally. He is kind to the wife of
his father's law partner even though she seduces
him with cold-bloodedly calculating carnality. Ben
then falls in love with Elaine, his mistress's daugh-
ter, and makes her marry him through the sheer
persistence of his pursuit.
The screenplay has been improved by a series of
little changes and omissions constituting a pattern
of discretion and abstraction. The hero is made less
bumptious, the predatory wife less calculating, the
sensitive daughter less passive, and the recurring
parental admonitions are reduced in number and in-
tensity. The very end of the movie is apparently the
result of an anti-cliché improvisation. In the book,
Ben interrupts Elaine's wedding (to another) before
the troths have been plighted. In the movie, the
bride kisses the groom before Ben can disrupt the
proceeding, but the bride runs off just the same. And
this little change makes all the difference in drama-
tizing the triumph of people over proceedings. An
entire genre of Hollywood movies had been con-
structed upon the suspenseful chase-to-the-altar
proposition that what God hath joined together no
studio scriptwriter can put asunder. The Graduate
not only shatters this monogamous mythology; it
does so in the name of a truer love. . . . I was with
The Graduate all the way because I responded fully
to its romantic feelings. Some people have com-
plained that the Bancroft-Hoffman relationship is
more compelling than the subsequent Ross-Hoffman
relationship. I don't agree. It is easier to be interest-
ing with an unconventional sexual relationship than
with a conventional love pairing. The Graduate is
moving precisely because its hero passes from a
premature maturity to an innocence regained, an
idealism reconfirmed. That he is so much out of his
time and place makes him more of an individual
and less of a type. Even the overdone caricatures
that surround the three principals cannot diminish
the cruel beauty of this love story.
Passage 2
Part of the fun of movies is in seeing "what
everybody's talking about," and if people are flock-
ing to a movie, or if the press can con us into think-
ing that they are, then ironically, there is a sense in
which we want to see it, even if we suspect we
won't enjoy it, because we want to know what's
going on. Even if it's the worst inflated pompous
trash that is the most talked about (and it usually is)
and even if that talk is manufactured, we want to
see the movies because so many people fall for
whatever is talked about that they make the adver-
tisers' lies true.
An analyst tells me that when his patients are not
talking about their personal hang-ups and their im-
mediate problems they talk about the situations and
characters in movies like The Graduate, and they
talk about them with as much personal involvement
Practice Test 3
Practice Test 3
GO ON TO THE NEXT PAGE
Section 8: Critical Reading
Time: 20 Minutes
15 Questions
In this section, choose the best answer for each question and blacken the corresponding space on the answer sheet.
Directions: Questions follow the passages below. Using only the stated or implied information in each passage and in
the introduction, if any, answer the questions.
as about their immediate problems. The high-
school and college students identifying with Dustin
Hoffman's Benjamin are not that different from the
stenographer who used to live and breathe with the
Joan Crawford-working girl and worry about
whether that rich boy would really make her
happy-and considered her pictures "great." They
don't see the movie as a movie but as part of the
soap opera of their lives. The person who responds
this way does not respond more freely but less
freely and less fully than the person who is aware of
what is well done and what is badly done in a
movie, who can accept some things in it and reject
others, who uses all his senses in reacting, not just
his emotional vulnerabilities. The small triumph of
The Graduate was to have domesticated alienation
and the difficulty of communication, by making
what Benjamin is alienated from a middle-class
comic strip and making it absurdly evident that he
has nothing to communicate-which is just what
makes him an acceptable hero for the large movie
audience. The Graduate isn't a bad movie, it's en-
tertaining, though in a fairly slick way. What's sur-
prising is that so many people take it so seriously.
What's funny about the movie are the laughs on
that dumb sincere boy who wants to talk about art
in bed. But then the movie begins to pander to
youthful narcissism, glorifying his innocence, and
making the predatory (and now crazy) woman the
villainess. Commercially this works: the inarticu-
late dull boy becomes a romantic hero for the audi-
ence to project into with all those squishy and now
conventional feelings of look, his parents don't
communicate with him; look, he wants truth not
sham, and so on. But the movie betrays itself and
its own expertise, sells out its comic moments that
click along with the rhythm of a hit Broadway
show, to make the oldest movie pitch of them all-
asking the audience to identify with the simpleton
who is the latest version of the misunderstood
teenager and the pure-in-heart boy next door. It's
almost painful to tell kids who have gone to see
The Graduate eight times that once was enough for
you because you've already seen it [in other ver-
sions]. How could you convince them that a movie
that sells innocence is a very commercial piece of
work when they're so clearly in the market to buy
innocence? The Graduate only wants to succeed
and that's fundamentally what's the matter with it.
This kind of moviemaking shifts values, shifts
focus, shifts emphasis, shifts everything for a sure-
fire response. Mike Nichols's "gift" is that he lets the
audience direct him; this is demagoguery in the arts.
The success of The Graduate is sociological: the
revelation of how emotionally accessible modern
youth is to the same old manipulation. The recur-
rence of certain themes in movies suggests that
each generation wants romance restated in slightly
new terms, mooning away in fixation on them-
selves and thinking this fixation meant movies had
suddenly become an art, and their art.
1. It can be inferred from the first paragraph of
Passage 1 that Charles Webb is
A. the director of the film The Graduate.
B. the author of the novel on which the film
The Graduate is based.
C. the author of the screenplay of The Graduate.
D. the actor playing Benjamin Braddock in the
film The Graduate.
E. a character in The Catcher in the Rye.
2. In Passage 1, line 6, the phrase "playing down"
means
A. concluding.
B. minimizing.
C. making unscrupulous use of.
D. excluding.
E. participating in.
3. By referring to the novel The Graduate's
"reduction of the world to the ridiculous scale of
an overgrown and outdated Holden Caulfield" (the
hero of Salinger's The Catcher in the Rye), the
author of Passage 1 suggests that
I. the characterization of Benjamin Braddock
in the novel is inferior to that in the film.
II. the Salinger novel is overgrown and
outdated.
III. the film is superior to the novel The
Graduate.
A. III only
B. I and II only
C. I and III only
D. II and III only
E. I, II, and III
Part II: Practice-Review-Analyze-Practice
4. As it is used in Passage 1, the word "bumptious"
(line 25) means
A. passive.
B. slovenly.
C. yokel-like.
D. arrogant.
E. jolting.
5. According to the critic of Passage 1, the most
original event in the plot of the film is having
A. Benjamin fall in love with Elaine, the
daughter of his mistress.
B. the older woman the seducer of the younger
man.
C. Benjamin pursue Elaine despite her
engagement to another man.
D. Benjamin interrupt Elaine's wedding after
vows are exchanged.
E. the young lovers united at the end.
6. According to Passage 1, the theme of the film
The Graduate is the
A. recovery of idealism through love.
B. self-indulgent narcissism of youth.
C. older generation's failure to nurture the
younger.
D. myth of the monogamous marriage.
E. superiority of institutions to people.
7. The argument of the first paragraph of Passage 2
(lines 56-67) is that
A. the advertising for films is often false.
B. too many people believe advertisers and go
to bad movies as a result.
C. people go to movies partly to discover what
has made a film popular or talked about.
D. people waste time and money at trashy
movies because they cannot see the falsity of
advertising.
E. more people would go to better films if
advertising were more honest.
8. According to the critic of Passage 2, the popular
success of The Graduate is due to the fact that
Benjamin
A. is empty-headed.
B. is alienated.
C. is unable to communicate with his parents.
D. matures in the course of the film.
E. is sincere.
9. In Passage 2, the meaning of the word "gift" in
line 124 is
A. present.
B. talent.
C. secret.
D. idea.
E. blessing.
10 .When Passage 2 says that Mike Nichols "lets the
audience direct him" (lines 124-125), it is saying that
A. a good director has a firm hold on all the
details of a film.
B. Nichols's films are badly directed because
they are too difficult for many audiences to
follow.
C. Nichols does not pay enough attention to the
needs of his actors.
D. Nichols gives the audience what he knows it
likes.
E. Nichols is indifferent to commercial success.
11. According to Passage 2, The Graduate is
sociologically valuable because it
A. exposes the sentimentality of a generation.
B. expresses the universality of alienation in
the modern world.
C. teaches mutual respect between the sexes.
D. expresses the nature of the difficulties
generations that cannot communicate
must face.
E. reveals how different the generation of the
late 1960s is from older generations.
12 . Of the following phrases from Passage 2, all might
be applied by their author to the author of the first
passage EXCEPT
A. a critic who is "not that different from the
stenographer who used to live and breathe
with the Joan Crawford-working girl" (lines
B. a critic who sees a movie as "part of the soap
opera of" his life (lines 80-81)
C. a critic who "uses all his senses in reacting,
not just his emotional vulnerabilities" (lines
D. a critic "clearly in the market to buy
innocence" (lines 119-120)
E. a critic "emotionally accessible . . . to the
same old manipulation" (lines 127-128)
Practice Test 3
Practice Test 3
GO ON TO THE NEXT PAGE
13 . With which of the following comments on the film
would the authors of both Passage 1 and Passage 2
agree?
I. The presentation of Ben's parents is a
caricature.
II. The older woman who seduces Ben is
presented as predatory.
III. The latter part of the movie attempts to
present Ben as an exemplar of innocence.
A. II only
B. I and II only
C. I and III only
D. II and III only
E. I, II, and III
Questions 14-15 are based on the following passage.
A person experiencing synesthesia may "see"
green when hearing a particular musical note, or
taste sweetness when touching a circular object.
Rather than remaining separate, the senses get
mixed up. Francis Galton, Charles Darwin's cousin,
published a paper on synesthesia in 1880, but many
people dismissed the phenomenon, attributing it to
the effects of drug use or perhaps childhood memo-
ries. In recent years, however, research suggests that
synesthesia results from a kind of cross-wiring in
the brain-that is, two normally separate areas of
the brain elicit activity in each other. In studying
synesthesia, scientists are learning how the brain
processes sensory information and uses it to make
connections between seemingly unrelated inputs.
An interesting finding, according to one study, is
that synesthesia is much more common in creative
people than in the general population.
14 . The author of the passage cites the article by
Francis Galton primarily to
A. show the importance of synesthesia to the
scientific community.
B. explain how the phenomenon received its
name.
C. suggest that Charles Darwin was interested
in the phenomenon.
D. dismiss the idea that synesthesia is merely
the result of childhood memories.
E. indicate that the phenomenon of synesthesia
was recognized in the 19th century.
15 . Which of the following statements is suggested by
the last sentence of the paragraph?
A. The brain processes of creative people are
identical to the brain processes of people
who experience synesthesia.
B. People unable to experience synesthesia will
be inclined to prefer professions requiring
logical thinking.
C. Creativity may be related to the ability to
make connections between seemingly
unrelated inputs.
D. Because of cross-wiring in the brain, creative
people are often unstable and erratic.
E. The frequent occurrence of synesthesia
among creative people is probably related to
drug use.
Part II: Practice-Review-Analyze-Practice
IF YOU FINISH BEFORE TIME IS CALLED, CHECK YOUR WORK ON THIS
SECTION ONLY . DO NOT WORK ON ANY OTHER SECTION IN THE TEST. STOP
Section 9: Mathematics
Time: 25 Minutes
20 Questions
Directions: This section is composed of two types of questions. Use the 25 minutes allotted to answer both question
types. For questions 1-10, select the one correct answer of the five choices given and mark the corresponding circle on
your answer sheet. Your scratch work should be done on any available space in the section.
Notes
1. All numbers used are real numbers.
2. Calculators can be used.
3. Some problems may be accompanied by figures or diagrams. These figures are drawn as accurately as possible
EXCEPT when it is stated in a specific problem that a figure is not drawn to scale. The figures and diagrams are
meant to provide information useful in solving the problem or problems. Unless otherwise stated, all figures and
diagrams lie in a plane.
Data That Can Be Used for Reference
rectangle
A = lw
Area
triangle
circle
rectangular solid
V = lwh
Volume
right circular cylinder
Pythagorean Relationship
Special T riangles
A circle is composed of 360°
A straight angle measures 180°
The sum of the angles of a triangle is 180°
w
l
h
b
r
M
r
h
l
h
w
a2 + b2 = c 2
C B
A
c
a
b
x
x
Practice Test 3
Practice Test 3
GO ON TO THE NEXT PAGE
1. The length of a rectangle is 6l, and the width is
4w. What is the perimeter?
A. 24lw
B. 20lw
C. 10lw
D. 12l + 8w
E. 6l + 4w
## -- =
3. What is the average of ,,3
5and ?
C. 4
D. 4
E. 4
4. What is the value of y if .y 04 8= ?
B. .4
Part II: Practice-Review-Analyze-Practice
5. How many inches are in m yards and n feet?
A. m + n
C. 36(m + n)
D. 3m + n
E. 12(m + n)
6. If x
xx
-+ = 3, then x =
A. -4
B. 7
C. 0
D. 7
E. 4
7. The endpoints of the diameter of a circle have
coordinates (-5, 8) and (-3, 5). What are the
coordinates of the center of the circle?
A. ,4 2
B. ,1 2
3-cm
C. ,1 2
3-cm
D. (-8, 13)
E. (-2, 3)
8. What is the value of 10
Practice Test 3
Practice Test 3
GO ON TO THE NEXT PAGE
9. In the circles above, OX = 10 and XY = 2. What is
the ratio of the area of the shaded region to the
area of the larger circle?
A. 5
B. 5
10 . How many four-digit numbers are possible if the
first digit cannot be zero and the number is
divisible by 5?
O
Y X
Part II: Practice-Review-Analyze-Practice
Directions for Student-Produced Response Questions (Grid-ins): Questions 11-20 require you to solve the
problems and enter your answers by carefully marking the circles on the special grid. Examples of the appropriate way
to mark the grid follow.
Answer: 3.7 Answer: 2
Answer: 1 2
Do not grid in mixed numbers in the form of mixed numbers. Always change mixed numbers to improper fractions or
decimals.
Change to 1.5 or Change to 2
.. .
.. .
.. .
Fraction bar
.. .
Decimal point
Practice Test 3
Practice Test 3
GO ON TO THE NEXT PAGE
Answer: 123
Space permitting, answers can start in any column. Each grid-in answer that follows is correct.
Note: Circles must be filled in correctly to receive credit. Mark only one circle in each column. No credit will be given
if more than one circle in a column is marked. Example:
Answer: 258 (no credit)
.. .
.. .
.. .
Part II: Practice-Review-Analyze-Practice
Answer: 9
Accuracy of decimals: Always enter the most accurate decimal value that the grid will accommodate. For example: An
answer such as .8888 . . . can be gridded as .888 or .889. Gridding this value as .8, .88, or .89 is considered inaccurate
and therefore not acceptable. The acceptable grid-ins of 9
are:
Be sure to write your answers in the boxes at the top of the circles before doing your gridding. Although writing out the
answers above the columns is not required, it is very important to ensure accuracy. Even though some problems may
have more than one correct answer, grid only one answer. Grid-in questions contain no negative answers.
.. .
.. .
.. .
Practice Test 3
Practice Test 3
GO ON TO THE NEXT PAGE
=+ , what is F when C = 19?
12 . Red, green, and white jellybeans are combined in
a ratio of 5:4:3, respectively. What is the ratio of
green jelly beans to the total number of jelly beans?
13 . A picture 8 inches by 10 inches is bordered by a
frame that is 1 2
inches wide. What is the total area
of the picture and the frame in square inches?
14 . According to the graph above, if the test contains
5 numeration problems, then how many algebra
problems would be expected?
Note: Figure not drawn to scale.
15 . If, in the figure above, y = 3x, then x =
16 . If 150% of y is equal to 60% of z, and y and z are
not zero, then y/z =
17. Three-fourths of a circle is divided into six equal
parts. What fractional part of the whole circle does
each piece represent?
measurement
geometry30%
algebra
numeration10%
statistics
Review Test Areas
Part II: Practice-Review-Analyze-Practice
18 . Of the seven days shown in the graph above, what
percent of the days did the maximum temperature
exceed the average temperature? (Disregard the %
sign when gridding your answer.)
19 . How many days would it take for two people
working together to complete a job if it takes one
person 6 days working alone and it takes the other
person 10 days working alone to complete the
same job?
20. A fraction is equivalent to 3
. If its numerator is
decreased by 2 and its denominator is increased by
3, the new fraction is equivalent to 3
. What is the
original fraction?
Date
Temperature
Maximum Temperature Readings
Los Angeles: July 10-16, 1993
50 year
average
Practice Test 3
Practice Test 3
IF YOU FINISH BEFORE TIME IS CALLED, CHECK YOUR WORK ON THIS
SECTION ONLY . DO NOT WORK ON ANY OTHER SECTION IN THE TEST. STOP
Part II: Practice-Review-Analyze-Practice
Section 1 0: Writing-Multiple Choice
Time: 10 Minutes
15 Questions
In this section, choose the best answer for each question and blacken the corresponding space on the answer sheet.
Directions: The following questions test correctness and effective expression. In selecting the answer, pay attention
to grammar, diction, sentence structure, and punctuation. In the following questions, part or all of each sentence is
underlined. The A answer repeats the underlined portion of the original sentence, while the next four offer alternatives.
Choose the answer that best expresses the meaning of the original sentence, and at the same time is grammatically cor-
rect and stylistically superior. The correct choice should be clear, unambiguous, and concise.
EXAMPLE:
The forecaster predicted rain and the sky was clear.
A. rain and the sky was clear.
B. rain but the sky was clear.
C. rain the sky was clear.
D. rain, but the sky was clear.
E. rain being as the sky was clear.
The correct answer is D.
1. Alexander Frater was educated in Australia, when
he emigrated to England, and eventually became a
correspondent for a London newspaper.
A. when he emigrated to England,
B. emigrated to England,
C. while he emigrated to England,
D. emigrating to England,
E. from whence he emigrated to England,
2. In Hawaii, they are emphasizing the Hawaiian
language as a part of a renaissance in the native
culture, including music and dance.
A. they are emphasizing the Hawaiian language
as a part of
B. the emphasis on the Hawaiian language is
part of
C. they are putting emphasis on Hawaiian as a
language as part of
D. by emphasizing the Hawaiian language, they
are creating a part of
E. the emphasis on the Hawaiian language is to
them a part of
3. Women are starting small businesses twice as fast
as men; one of twenty working women is now
self-employed.
A. twice as fast as men; one of
B. twice as fast as men one of
C. twice as fast as men, one of
D. two times as fast as men, one of
E. two times as fast as men one of
4. Illiteracy costs more than five billion dollars in
unemployment and welfare benefits yearly,
affecting one-fifth of the adult population.
A. Illiteracy costs more than five billion dollars
in unemployment and welfare benefits
yearly, affecting one-fifth of the adult
population.
B. Yearly, illiteracy costs more than five billion
dollars in unemployment and welfare
benefits, affecting one-fifth of the adult
population.
C. Affecting one-fifth of the adult population,
illiteracy costs more than five billion dollars
in unemployment and welfare benefits
yearly.
D. Yearly affecting one-fifth of the adult
population, illiteracy costs more than five
billion dollars in unemployment and welfare
benefits.
E. Costing more than five billion dollars in
unemployment and welfare benefits,
illiteracy affects one-fifth of the adult
population yearly.
5. Luis Jimenez's fiberglass sculpture Fiesta Jarabe
depicting a traditional hat dance, and placed just
north of the Mexican border.
A. depicting a traditional hat dance, and placed
B. depicting a traditional hat dance, and is
placed
C. depicting a traditional hat dance
D. depicts a traditional hat dance, placed
E. depicts a traditional hat dance and is placed
6. At one time, nearly all of Kuwait's 700 oil wells
were on fire the crippled refineries were closed.
A. fire the crippled
B. fire but the crippled
C. fire, crippled, the
D. fire; the crippled
E. fire, crippled
7. The sky-diver compared his feelings of elation to
winning a lottery, scoring a touchdown, or beating
the odds in Las Vegas.
A. to winning a lottery, scoring a touchdown, or
beating
B. to when one wins a lottery, scores a
touchdown, or beats
C. to winning a lottery, to scoring a touchdown,
or beating
D. to winning a lottery, to scoring a touchdown,
or to beating
E. to a win in a lottery, scoring a touchdown, or
beating
8. In 1982, Arun Shourie exposed a multi-million
dollar scandal that involved the Prime Minister's
son, and he lost his job as a newspaper editor.
A. In 1982, Arun Shourie exposed a multi-
million dollar scandal that involved the
Prime Minister's son, and he
B. Arun Shourie, exposing in 1982 a multi-
million dollar scandal that involved the
Prime Minister's son, lost
C. In 1982, having exposed a multi-million
dollar scandal that involved the Prime
Minister's son, Arun Shourie
D. It was 1982 when Arun Shourie exposed a
multi-million dollar scandal involving the
Prime Minister's son, and he
E. In 1982, Arun Shourie exposed a multi-
million dollar scandal that involved the
Prime Minister's son, and consequently he
9. The population of beluga whales in the Gulf of St.
Lawrence has failed to increase, and this worries
many marine biologists.
A. increase, and this
B. increase; and this
C. increase; this
D. increase, which
E. increase, a fact that
Practice Test 3
Practice Test 3
GO ON TO THE NEXT PAGE
10 . The developer plans to dismantle and move a
fourteenth-century English church to Nevada
which will give it the oldest church in the western
hemisphere.
A. which will give it
B. and this will give it
C. which will give the state
D. and this will give the state
E. to give the state
11. Banking regulators have seized a Georgia savings
bank and charged that the institution both used
deceptive lending and business practices and it
misled its stockholders.
A. both used deceptive lending and business
practices and it misled
B. both used deceptive business lending
practices and it misled
C. used deceptive lending and business
practices and misled
D. both used lending and business practices that
were deceptive, misleading
E. used both deceptive and misleading business
and lending practices, and it misled
12 . For three years, the group called White Flag has
virtually ignored Chicago, the city where they
started in.
A. has virtually ignored Chicago, the city where
they started in.
B. have virtually ignored Chicago, the city
where they started in.
C. has virtually ignored Chicago, the city where
it started.
D. has virtually ignored Chicago, where they
started.
E. have virtually ignored the city where they
started, Chicago.
13 . Readers admire Margaret Fuller's eagerness to
succeed, that she is willing to work hard, and her
refusal to give up.
A. eagerness to succeed, that she is willing to
work hard, and her refusal to give up.
B. eagerness for success, willingness to work
hard, and that she refuses to give up.
C. being eager to succeed, willing to work hard,
and her refusal to give up.
D. eagerness to succeed, willingness to work
hard, and refusal to give up.
E. being eager to succeed, being willing to
work hard, and refusing to give up.
14 . Understanding why a sentence or a paragraph is
awkward is essentially no different from when you
see why a mathematical proof is unconvincing.
A. from when you see
B. from if you see
C. from seeing
D. than when you see
E. than if you see
15 . Where the main purpose of the greenhouse is to
raise half-hardy plants for planting out in the
garden or to grow flowering plants in pots for cut
flowers and for bringing into the house.
A. Where the main purpose of the greenhouse is
B. When the main purpose of the greenhouse is
C. The main purpose of the greenhouse is
D. If the main purpose of the greenhouse were
E. While the main purpose of the greenhouse is
Part II: Practice-Review-Analyze-Practice
IF YOU FINISH BEFORE TIME IS CALLED, CHECK YOUR WORK ON THIS
SECTION ONLY . DO NOT WORK ON ANY OTHER SECTION IN THE TEST. STOP
Scoring Practice Test 3
Answer Key for Practice Test 3
Section 2: Mathematics
Practice Test 3
Practice Test 3
1. D
2. B
3. D
4. B
5. D
6. D
7. D
8. C
9. C
Section 3: Writing-Multiple Choice
1. D
2. C
3. A
4. D
5. C
6. E
7. D
8. C
9. A
Section 4: Critical Reading
1. C
2. B
3. A
4. E
5. D
6. C
7. B
8. A
9. D
Section 5: Mathematics
1. C
2. A
3. D
4. B
5. A
6. D
7. C
8. A
9. B
Part II: Practice-Review-Analyze-Practice
Section 6: Critical Reading
1. B
2. C
3. E
4. D
5. D
6. B
7. B
8. B
9. C
Section 7: Mathematics
1. C
2. D
3. D
4. A
5. D
6. B
7. E
8. D
9. D
Section 8: Critical Reading
1. B
2. B
3. C
4. D
5. D
6. A
7. C
8. A
9. B
Section 9: Mathematics
1. D
2. A
3. D
4. D
5. B
6. D
7. A
8. B
9. D
Section 1 0: Writing-Multiple Choice
1. B
2. B
3. A
4. C
5. E
6. D
7. A
8. C
9. E
Analyzing Your Test Results
The charts on the following pages should be used to carefully analyze your results and spot your strengths and weaknesses.
The complete process of analyzing each subject area and each individual problem should be completed for each practice
test. These results should then be reexamined for trends in types of errors (repeated errors) or poor results in specific subject
areas. This reexamination and analysis is of tremendous importance to you in assuring maximum test preparation benefit.
Reviewing the Essay
Have an English teacher, tutor, or someone else with good writing skills read and evaluate your essay using the Essay
Checklist given below. Have your reader evaluate the complete essay as good, average, or marginal. Note that your paper
would actually be scored from 1 to 6 by two trained readers (actual total score 2-12). But since we are trying only for a rough
approximation, the simple good, average, or marginal overall evaluation will give you a general feeling for your score range.
Use the following checklist to evaluate your essay:
■ Does the essay focus on the topic and complete the assigned task?
(Circle one: Excellent Average Poor)
■ Is the essay well organized, well developed, and consistent in argument?
(Circle one: Excellent Average Poor)
■ Does the essay use specific supporting details?
(Circle one: Excellent Average Poor)
■ Does the writing use correct grammar, usage, punctuation, and spelling?
(Circle one: Excellent Average Poor)
■ Is the handwriting legible?
(Circle one: Excellent Average Poor)
Critical Reading Analysis Sheet
Section 4 Possible Completed Right Wrong
Sentence Completion 8
Short Reading Passages 6
Long Reading Passages 1 4
Subtotal 28
Section 6 Possible Completed Right Wrong
Sentence Completion 1 0
Short Reading Passages 6
Long Reading Passages 1 2
Subtotal 28
Section 8 Possible Completed Right Wrong
Long Reading Passages 1 3
Short Reading Passages 2
Subtotal 15
Overall Critical Reading Totals 71
Practice Test 3
Practice Test 3
Mathematics Analysis Sheet
Section 2 Possible Completed Right Wrong
Multiple Choice 20
Subtotal 20
Section 5 Possible Completed Right Wrong
Multiple Choice 1 0
Grid-Ins 1 0
Subtotal 20
Section 7 Possible Completed Right Wrong
Multiple Choice 1 5
Subtotal 15
Section 9 Possible Completed Right Wrong
Multiple Choice 1 0
Grid-Ins 1 0
Subtotal 20
Overall Math Totals 75
Note: Only 3 math sections (about 55 questions) count on your actual exam on the new SAT.
Writing-Multiple-Choice Analysis Sheet
Section 3 Possible Completed Right Wrong
Improving Sentences 7
Identifying Sentence Errors 1 9
Improving Paragraphs 1 0
Subtotal 36
Section 10 Possible Completed Right Wrong
Improving Sentences 1 5
Subtotal 15
Overall Writing- 51
Multiple-Choice Totals
Part II: Practice-Review-Analyze-Practice
Analysis/Tally Sheet for Problems Missed
One of the most important parts of test preparation is analyzing why you missed a problem so that you can reduce the
number of mistakes. Now that you have taken the practice test and checked your answers, carefully tally your mistakes
by marking them in the proper column.
Reason for Mistakes
Total Simple Misread Lack of Lack of
Missed Mistake Problem Knowledge Time
Section 4: Critical Reading
Section 6: Critical Reading
Section 8: Critical Reading
Subtotal
Section 2: Mathematics
Section 5: Mathematics
Section 7: Mathematics
Section 9: Mathematics
Subtotal
Section 3: Writing-Multiple Choice
Section 1 0: Writing-Multiple Choice
Subtotal
Total Reading, Math, and Writing
Reviewing the preceding data should help you determine why you are missing certain problems. Now that you've pin-
pointed the type of error, compare it to other practice tests to spot other common mistakes.
Complete Answers and Explanations for Practice Test 3
Section 2: Mathematics
1. D. Multiplying each side by 3
3m + n = 7
3(3m + n) = 3(7)
Therefore, 9 m + 3n = 21
2. B. If 3
of the container is full, there remains 3
of the container to fill. The time to fill 3
of the container will be
half as long as the time needed to fill 3
of the container. Hence, 2
(18 minutes) = 9 minutes.
Practice Test 3
Practice Test 3
3. D. Since the sum of the angles is 180°,
m + n = 83
Hence, the sum of m + n is 83°.
4. B. Since the square of a positive number is a positive number, choice B is the correct answer.
5. D. If Tom is 4 years older than Fran, if we call Fran's age x, Tom's age must be 4 years more, or x + 4. Therefore,
since the total of their ages is 24, Fran's age + Tom's age = 24.
x + (x + 4) = 24
6. D. x1 2
1 hours
hours
Cross multiplying yields 840 x = 3500 ⋅1 2
x = 6 4
1 hours
7. D. The seventh row will be 1-6-15-20-15-6-1, which contains no prime numbers.
8. C. yx
yx
Multiplying by the lowest common denominator, which is 28,
c
c
m
m
9. C. There are 40 - 24 = 16 boys in the class.
x
x
x
of number
is number
percent=
Hence, 40% of the class are boys.
10 . D. Perimeter of /H17005MNP = 2
(perimeter of /H17005XYZ)
1 (XY + YZ + XZ)
Part II: Practice-Review-Analyze-Practice
11. C. Using the Pythagorean theorem, a2 + b2 = c2
(BC)2 = (CD)2 + (DB)2
Hence, the radius of the circle is 13.
12 . E. So far, George has averaged 80% on each of three tests. Therefore, his total points scored equals three times
80, or 240 points. In order to average 85% of four tests, George needs a total point score of four times 85, or 340
points. Since George presently is 100 points short of 340, he needs to get 100 points, or 100%, on the fourth test.
13 . A.
xy z t
x
xy z
xt
yz xt
yzz xt z
y xt z
If
-+= +
c
c
i
i
m
m
14 . B. Area of larger circle = 144π. Since area = πr2, then
radius of a larger circle = 12
diameter of a smaller circle = 12
radius of a smaller circle = 6
area of a smaller circle = πr2
15 . A. Substituting 2 for m and 3 for n gives
2= +-
A B
C
Practice Test 3
Practice Test 3
16 . D. If b
a
d
c= , then, by cross multiplying, ad = bc.
If b
d ac= , then cross multiplying gives the same result, ad = bc.
Hence, if b
a
d
c= , then b
d ac= .
17. E. First, rearrange and simplify the first equation as follows. Add +12 and +6y to both sides of the equation
6x - 12 = -6y, and you get
xy
yy
xy
-= -
++= + +
Now, dividing through by 6 leaves
x + y = 2
Next, rearrange and simplify the second equation as follows.
5y + 5x = 15 is the same as 5x + 5y = 15
Now, dividing through by 5 leaves
x + y = 3
The equations x + y = 2 and x + y = 3 have no solutions in common because you can't add the same two numbers
and get two different answers.
18 . B. Since y varies directly as x, y = kx for some constant k. Since x = 18 when y = 12,
and yx 3
2=cm
Hence, when x = 20, y 3
2 20=c ^m h
19 . A. Ratio of diameters = ratio of radii.
d
d
r
r
== =
Ratio of area = (ratio of radii)2.
A
A
r
r
A
A
cm
Hence the area of circle R is 100
, or 9%, of the area of circle S.
20. E. If the coordinates of two points X and Y are (x1, y1) and (x2, y2), respectively, then the coordinates of the
midpoint B ( m1, m2) of xy are
,,xx yy mm22
+ + =d ^n h
Part II: Practice-Review-Analyze-Practice
Hence m xx
= + and m yy
= -+^h and
y
+_i
= -+^^ ^ chh h m and y22 2 2
-= +^^ dhh n
Therefore, the coordinates of Y are (x2, y2) = (14, -7).
Section 3: Writing-Multiple Choice
Improving Sentences
1. D. The original version has faulty parallelism and is verbose. B is not so wordy, but it shifts from the active verb
("affects") to "affected are." The "also being affected" of E is no better. The best choice is D, which is the most
concise of the five and a parallel construction of the series.
2. C. This is another of those sentences in which the pronouns have no specific antecedents, but refer to a general
idea or the entire first clause. Changing pronouns (from "which" to "this") does no good. To repair a sentence like
this, you must either supply a specific antecedent (you might say "a fact which is surprising"), or get rid of the
pronoun. Choice C eliminates the pronoun.
3. A. This sentence is a series; the original version here is the best of the five-parallel, correctly punctuated with
commas, and concise. The semicolons of B are incorrect; C has an extra "and." D and E break up the parallel
construction.
4. D. This sentence runs on two sentences without any punctuation or connective between them. Here the semicolon
is the best choice with the two independent clauses. It won't work in E because the second clause is no longer
independent; it is now a sentence fragment.
5. C. Set sentence C against A, and you see that four words ("In," "it," "and," and "does") can be cut with no
change of meaning. None of the four other versions of the sentence is as economical as C, though they are all
grammatical, except A which has the vague pronoun "it."
6. E. The original sentence here is not really wrong, but it is less effective because it treats all the elements as equal,
while the superior version, E, subordinates the first clause, making the meaning of the relation between parts of
the sentence clearer. Here choice D is a shorter sentence than E, but the gain in clarity is worth more than the gain
in economy.
7. D. The phrase that begins this sentence begins with the past participle "Nestled," and, predictably, that opening
participial phrase dangles. The town, not its extinction, nestles, so we can eliminate A, B, and C. Choice D is
more concise than E.
Identifying Sentence Errors
8. C. The verb "agreed" and the opening phrase "strange as it now seems" place the action of this sentence in the
past. The verb "fears" ought to be "feared," since the point of the sentence is that though Japan once feared Italian
competition, it no longer does.
9. A. The singular subject "darkness" does not agree with the plural verb "were"; the verb should be "was."
10 . C. It is the pronoun "who" not the verb "appear" that is in error here. The pronoun refers to the sets of teeth,
mechanisms not human beings, so the correct pronoun is "which" or "that."
Practice Test 3
Practice Test 3
11. C. The sentence changes from a second person subject ("you") to a third person ("one"). It should be either "you
can . . . you must" or "one can . . . one must."
12 . E. There is no error in this sentence.
13 . B. A subject and verb in this sentence are separated and do not agree. Since the singular verb "is" is not
underlined and cannot be changed, "huge doses" must be changed to "a huge dose" to correct the grammar.
14 . A. The opening phrase is not idiomatic. We say "as a result of" or "resulting from."
15 . E. There is no error in the sentence.
16 . C. Since the first part of the sentence lists three, the singular "method" should be the plural "methods."
17. D. The error in this sentence is the unidiomatic use of the preposition "with." The usual expression to denote the
index level is "stands at."
18 . B. The error is the confusion of an adjective and an adverb. The right word to modify the adjective "easy" here is
the adverb "easily."
19 . D. The subject of the sentence, the singular "Peninsula," follows the verb, the plural "lie." It should be "lies."
20. C. The "they" in this sentence is an ambiguous pronoun. It could refer to any of the animals including the deer,
beavers, and squirrels which are not, as a rule, dangerous.
21. C. The problem is the phrase "without he succeeds." A better one would be "without success" or "without
succeeding."
22. E. The sentence is grammatical and idiomatic.
23. C. The sequence of tenses here is inconsistent. The first and second verbs use the present tense ("is," "is") but the
third uses the future instead of another present.
24. A. If you ignore the "Texans" the error is easy to find: "that us talk oddly." It is an error of pronoun case, using
the objective "us" rather than the subjective "we" as the subject of a clause.
25. B. This is a diction error. The word "requisite" is a noun or an adjective, but not the verb the context calls for.
The right word is the verb "require."
26. A. There is an agreement problem here. The sentence gives only one example, Wilder's Our Town.To be
consistent, the sentence has to begin with "The best example . . . "
Improving Paragraphs
27. B. The problem in this sentence is the pronoun "this" which has no specific antecedent. Choices A, C, and E all
keep the vague "this," while in D the vague pronoun is "that." Only B avoids the difficulty; "this" modifies "way."
28. D. These sentences are verbose, especially since "was not handed" in 4 is followed in 6 with the repetitive "He didn't
have them handed to him." This part of 4 should be eliminated in the revision. Another redundancy is following
"possessions" with "that he has," since possessions are what "he has." Here D, the shortest, is also the best revision.
29. A. In the first paragraph, the writer asserts that life does not hand us things for free, and that he is glad this is so.
The second paragraph gives reasons to explain this view. Choice E is inaccurate since the personal references are
in the first paragraph, while the second is more general.
30. E. The phrase "get all of their success handed or given to them" is awkward and verbose. There is no need for both
"given" and "handed." B has usage errors ("that" for "who," the vague "it"). The comparison in C is not parallel, and
in D it is illogical, comparing work with people who work. E maintains a clear parallel and is not wordy.
31. C. The final paragraph uses the pronoun "you." Though "you" is used once in the second paragraph, all the other
sentences use the third person.
32. A. The last paragraph summarizes the writer's position-that unearned wealth will not bring happiness.
Part II: Practice-Review-Analyze-Practice
33. E. The only version here that avoids a dangling participle is E, which supplies a subject and verb ("we . . . got").
In A, B, C, and D, it is the weather that arrives after nine, not the wedding guests.
34. C. The trouble here is the use of "like" as a conjunction in the phrase "feel like this would be . . . " The error is
minor, but given a chance to revise the sentence, you are better off with C, which eliminates "like." All the other
choices use "like" as a conjunction, though the verbs are different.
35. B. The issue here is the comma splice. Since "the sky was gray" is a complete sentence, it should be separated
from "dismal" by either a semicolon or a period. E corrects the original error, but introduces another comma
splice after "gray."
36. A. The passage does not rely on figurative language (metaphor and simile). It does arrange events chronologically,
connect the first and last sentence (by repeating "Idaho"), use a first person speaker ("I"), and use details of the
weather to convey mood (sentences 5-7 and 12-13).
Section 4: Critical Reading
Sentence Completion
1. C. The adjective needed here will describe the growing fear of the watchers of the endangered boat. Choice B
"intrepid" means fearless, and "cowardly" A, although it describes a fearful person, is for those who fear for
themselves, not others. The best choice is "apprehensive," meaning uneasy, anxious, or troubled by fears.
2. B. "Native" and "indigenous" here mean the same thing. Since even the best language students who are foreign
will not understand the native speaker, the missing word must mean something like puzzled or bewildered. The
best choice, then, is "baffled."
3. A. With the use of "merely" and "not censorship," the sentence implies that the missing first word describes
some minor changes in a test, something like "editing," or "revising," or "corrections" but not so serious as
"expurgation" or "decimation." The phrase "with the writer's prior knowledge and" suggests that the last word
must mean something like approval. In B the use of "prohibition" and in C the use of "disapproval" won't work,
so the correct choice must be A "permission."
4. E. The missing noun probably describes a strength, since it is being tested and is parallel to the phrase "capacity
to adapt." The best choice is "resilience," that is, the capacity to bounce back, to recover strength or good spirits.
5. D. The first noun is probably a synonym for "trend," but although D "fad" looks like the best choice, "prank" or
"whim" might work. The second noun describes a serious threat (not an "innocent" or harmless "trend"). Either
"peril" A (danger) or "hazard" D (risk) will do, but since D has the better first answer, it is the better choice.
6. C. Since the second half of the sentence tells us of the public's "disapproval," the missing participle must reflect this
attitude. Either "horrified" C or "repulsed" D will fit. Only "ghoulish" continues the expression of condemnation.
A "repulsed" public would not find the jewelry "amiable."
7. B. The first term, a verb, has "response" as its object; choices A and C do not fit this context. The second term,
a noun, describes a point that can be reached. Only choices A, B, and C might fit here. Thus, the correct choice
is B. "Elicited" means evoked or drew, while "nadir" means the lowest point.
8. A. Since the missing word must be surprising in an atmosphere of "calm" and beauty, choices B, C, D, and E are
all unsuitable. But "untoward," that is, perverse, unseemly, unexpected, fits well.
Short Reading Passages
9. D. "Nevertheless" (in line 7) indicates that Nightingale pursued her interest despite social attitudes, suggesting
that she was dissatisfied with a woman's usual role. She convinced her family to allow her to do something that
was considered off-limits for a woman of her class; they did not sponsor her studies (choice B). Nothing in the
passage supports A, and Nightingale's religious feelings are not addressed at all, C. In spite of her putting splints
on her dog's paws, there is no indication in the rest of the paragraph that she wanted to be a veterinarian, E.
Practice Test 3
Practice Test 3
10 . B. The author cites the reduction in the hospital death rate immediately after stating that Nightingale took a team
of nurses to Turkey. D might seem correct, but the emphasis is on the reduction in the death rate, not on the
horrible conditions in hospitals. E might also seem possible, but this detail is used specifically to dramatize the
effect of the nurses, which is not the main idea of the paragraph. C is irrelevant because the passage deals with
Nightingale's becoming a nurse, not a physician. Finally, the reader has no way of determining whether A is true.
11. D. This is the main idea of the paragraph, whereas E, A, and C are minor points. The passage does not describe
American technology as "poor," B. See lines 4-7.
12 . A. The author presents the idea of a lagging American technology merely to argue against it in the rest of the
paragraph. B and C make no sense in context, and the "debt" owed by American technology to British technology
is not addressed at all. E is irrelevant to the question in lines 3-4.
13 . D. By using the phrase "Even oil industry leaders," the author of the paragraph is suggesting that global warming
is of concern not only to confirmed environmentalists but also to people whose primary interest is in making a
profit, not in preserving the environment. A and B are perhaps true, but the phrase doesn't pertain to them. C and
E are points not even considered in the paragraph.
14 . B. When warming causes snow and ice to melt, more areas are exposed to the sun. These areas then take in more
solar radiation and heat, thus increasing the speed of warming.
Long Reading Passages
15 . E. The passage mentions raccoons, cats, humans, and skunks as rabies victims. Since the first paragraph
explicitly limits the disease to any "mammal," carrion birds are not susceptible to the virus.
16 . C. Unless rabies is treated by "timely" injections of vaccine, it is a fatal disease (lines 3-5).
17. A. Although dogs are no longer the major carriers in countries with good veterinary services and laws requiring
inoculation, they still account for "90 percent of all human deaths from rabies," chiefly in developing nations.
18 . B. The number of fatalities from the disease is small in the United States because most dogs have been immunized,
people are aware of the danger of the disease, and those at risk of having been infected are treated before the
symptoms of the disease can develop. The virus is not rare in wild-animal populations. In lines 55-56, the passage
refers to an epidemic among raccoons in America.
19 . D. The word "feasible" means practicable or possible.
20. C. The treatment of humans can now include vaccine injections (in the abdomen or arm) and application of
rabies-specific antibodies in the wound area. The passage makes no mention of an oral recombinant vaccine.
21. B. The vaccine-laced bait should be useful in dealing with wild populations and with dogs in countries where
large-scale inoculation is impossible. The vaccine would not be useful in animals already infected, since once
the symptoms of the disease develop, it is too late to save the victim.
22. C. In lines 18-21, the speaker says she did not follow the Watergate proceedings because it was just a case of one
set of rich white people hoodwinking another set.
23. A. "Of a piece" means part of, consistent with, or in keeping with.
24. B. In this context, the word "acute" means shrewd or clever. Although some of the other meanings can apply in
other contexts, the word here is opposed to "ignorance" and associated with wit.
25. D. The words here are the thoughts of the speaker, not what she says. Throughout the passage, the reader knows
both what she says and also what she thinks but does not say. Aware here of the "pompous" remarks she had just
made, she is not eager to elaborate on these second-hand ideas, and remembering that Cox is a lawyer, she hopes
to herself that he will not cross-examine her further.
26. D. The comic scene she imagines-Cox left in West Philly "without a map or a bow tie"-is her response to his
inclusive "Our." The speaker does not feel of a piece with the white New England establishment, and it is the
pronoun which inspires her thoughts.
Part II: Practice-Review-Analyze-Practice
27. A. The Rector, a shrewd observer throughout the passage, has some idea of what is going on in the speaker's
mind. For a moment, he is afraid she will blurt out something that will embarrass the school. He is relieved that
the moment has passed without incident.
28. B. Because the passage was written some time after the events and allows the reader to know the thoughts of the
speaker, the selection as a whole is very frank, even self-critical. The author understands herself and reveals this
understanding very candidly. None of the other choices is appropriate.
Section 5: Mathematics
1. C. To find the tax at 7% on $132.95, simply round off and multiply (the rule for rounding off is "5 or above
rounds up"): 7% times $133.
Use a calculator without rounding off,
2. A. Since 1 raised to any power = 1,
3. D. The intersection of two sets is the set of elements that the two sets have in common. Since the sets have no
elements in common, their intersection is the empty set = { }.
percent
of number
is number=
Cross multiplying
x
x
x
x
x
5. A. b = Bob's age, c = Jane's age, d = Jim's age.
Since Bob is older than Jane, c < b.
Since Bob is younger than Jim, b < d.
Hence, c < b, and b < d, or c < b < d.
6. D. You could quickly eliminate choices A, B, and C, since the line goes down to the right the slope must be
negative. Using the following formula would give you the slope.
m xx
yy
a
a
a
a
Practice Test 3
Practice Test 3
7. C. Let 2x = first angle, 3x = second angle, 4x = third angle, and 6x = fourth angle. Since the sum of the measures
of the angles in a quadrilateral must be 360°,
x
2x = 48° = first angle
3x = 72° = second angle
4x = 96° = third angle
6x = 144° = fourth angle
Hence, the largest angle of the quadrilateral has a measure of 144°.
8. A. If today Lucy is 14, then last year she was 13. Likewise, if Charlie's age now is C, then last year he was C - 1.
Now, put these into an equation:
Transposing, 13 - 3 = 2(C - 1).
9. B. To find x-intercepts, set y = 0 and solve for x.
(x + 6)(x - 2) = 0
x = -6 or x = 2
10 . D. Let x = the missing number. Since the average of x and z is y,
xz y
xz y
xz y
xzz yz
xy z
+- = -
h
h
Grid-In Questions
11. Answer: 12
. Dividing both sides of the equation 12a = 5b by 12b,
b
a
b
b
b
a
Lucy's age last year is three years older than twice Charlie's age last year.
Part II: Practice-Review-Analyze-Practice
12 . Answer: 37.5. Since the female students make up 3 parts out of the total 8 parts, the percent of students that are
female is
x
x
x
x
x
13 . Answer: 45. Since each of the 5 shirts may be matched with each of the 3 pairs of slacks, and these combinations
may in turn be matched with each of the 3 sports jackets, the total number of combinations possible is
14 . Answer: 39. Squaring both sides of the original equation yields
m
m
m
`j
Checking the answer in the original equation for extraneous solutions,
-= -
Hence, m = 6 is the solution for the given equation.
15 . Answer: 8.78.
4 cantaloupes: 2 × 1.00 = $2.00 (4 = 2 × 2 for $1)
5 oranges: $1.00 + 2 × .39 = $1.78 (3 for $1 and 39 cents each for the other two)
To find the total, add
16 . Answer: 97. To average 89% for seven exams, Ben must have a total of (89)(7), or 623 points. To average 90%
for eight exams, Ben must have a total of (90)(8), or 720 points. Therefore, his score on the eighth exam must be
Practice Test 3
Practice Test 3
17. Answer: 72. The length of the side of a square with diagonal 12 is
The area of a square with side length x is
Ax
J
L
KK
N
P
OO
18 . Answer: 2000. Simply continue the chart as follows, adding 40 cents for each two years to Product A and
15 cents for each two years to Product B.
It is evident that the correct answer is 2000.
19 . Answer: 7. The area of a trapezoid is
Ah b b
h
h
h
h
h
h
h
20. Answer: 32. By the Pythagorean theorem,
x
Part II: Practice-Review-Analyze-Practice
Therefore, the length of the chord is
2x = 32 centimeters
Section 6: Critical Reading
Sentence Completion
1. B. The clue in the sentence is "banning." If cameras have been banned, the public will not see the whole story, so
their "access," right to approach, has been curtailed. The best word here is "denied," B. "Belied" means lied about.
2. C. The adverb "reluctantly" and the phrase "despite his care" suggest that the adjective that modifies "shoplifting"
here is one that distresses the grocer and, so you can infer, one that means frequent. The only word that is close is
"commonplace"; that is, common or ordinary.
3. E. The sentence presents the example of the same number of workers taking more time for the same job as an
example of Parkinson's law. The missing word in the law must explain this phenomenon. If work does something
to fill the time for its completion, and the time for its completion has increased, then work must grow larger to fill
the longer time. The missing word cannot be "decreases" or "grows easier." The right answer must be D or E, and
"expands," E, goes better with "fill." The missing verb must be a synonym for "states" or "says." Choices B, C,
and E would work, but E also has the best second answer.
4. D. The noun must reflect the mood of loud cheering or something happy, such as "happiness" B, "gladness" C,
"euphoria" D, or "buoyancy" E. The second word must qualify this mood, however, because the first clause
begins with "although." A proper word here could be "tempered" A or "moderated" D. The words "enervated"
and "debilitated," although they can mean weaken, cannot be used in this context. They refer to physical
weakness. Only D has two good choices; "euphoria" is a feeling of well-being.
5. D. The clues in the sentence tell you that the missing word must describe a conversation with no sentence longer
than four words. The correct answer is "terse"; that is, brief or to the point. None of the other choices is plausible.
6. B. The second term, a noun, must be a word that accords with a functioning government, so you can eliminate
"schism," "dichotomy," and "division." Either "compromise" or "consensus" (agreement) will fit. The first term,
an adjective, describes a position that should be abandoned. Therefore, "dogmatic" is a much better choice than
"sensible."
7. B. The words "conventional," "morality," and "conformity" suggest that the missing adjective to modify
"conformity" will express the correctness of the Victorian reader. Choice B "genteel" means polite, refined,
well bred-just what would be expected. The incorrect answers are all adjectives describing the opposite of
what is suggested by "conventional morality."
8. B. The opening clause with its "though" at the beginning suggests that the missing adjective will be the opposite of
"lively" and "interesting." The second missing word refers to the "lively" first chapter, so it must be a noun synonym
for liveliness. The choice of "tedious" B, "repetitive" C, "dull" D, or "boring" E would do for the first blank, but
only "pace" A or "verve" B are possible for the second. The right response must be B. Words like "torpor" and
"lethargy" are the opposite of what is needed for the second noun, and "verve" means vigor or energy.
9. C. The useful clues here are "dangerous," "without peppers or other spices," and "mild," with the latter two set in
opposition to the missing adjective by the word "but." Choices A, B, and D are just what you don't want. Both C,
"torrid" (that is, fiery or very hot), or E, "piquant," are possible, but because "piquant" suggests an agreeable
tartness and these dishes are dangerous, "torrid" is better.
x
x
Practice Test 3
Practice Test 3
10 . E. The second adjective, expressing the response of a malcontent (a dissatisfied or rebellious person), must be
disparaging, and the first adjective, coming before the "but," must be opposite in effect. The favorable first
adjectives are B "perfect," D "Edenic," and E "ideal," and the pejorative second words are A "irritating," C
"drab," and E "painful." The correct choice must be E.
Short Reading Passages
11. B. See lines 12-16. A might seem tempting, but the pointing of atoms in rock crystals was only the means by
which magnetic reversal was shown to have occurred. The passage does not consider a change in the direction of
lava flows, C, or convection currents, D. The paragraph does state that it appears that magnetic reversal occurs on
average ever 500,000 years; however, magnetic reversal is not a disturbance in some other undefined 500,000-
year cycle of the magnetic field, E.
12 . D. The solidified rocks can be age dated, and the alignment of atoms in the rocks reveals magnetic reversal.
The speed with which the reversal takes place is not indicated in the paragraph, C, nor is species extinction, B,
mentioned. The study of lava flows is important, E, but only because the lava flows produce magma, not because
their direction shifts.
13 . A. The final sentence of the paragraph clearly makes a contrast between the "drab spinster" and the poet. B, C,
and D are secondary points, and E is an issue not addressed in the passage.
14 . D. The sense of Dickinson in the paragraph is that she was a solitary person. None of the other definitions makes
sense in context. Nowhere is Dickinson described as snobbish or ill-natured, choices A and B, and the word
"eccentric," which precedes "reclusive," means E and is the opposite of C, making these poor choices for "reclusive."
15 . C. The details in Passage 2 emphasize Dickinson's insistence on choosing the right word. See lines 19-21. The
author mentions A, and refers to her metaphors and rhythm, B and E, but it is her precision with language that is
emphasized. D is indicated in the passage, but it is not what impresses the author; rather, it is "the means to an
end," that is, Dickinson's precision.
16 . B. See lines 10-12 in Passage 1 and lines 17-19 in Passage 2. The author of Passage 1 focuses on her life, but
doesn't indicate he finds her life more "interesting" than her work, A. He also doesn't describe her as "pathetic,"
even though she lived a secluded life, D. The author of Passage 2 doesn't address Dickinson's life at all, C, and
the author of Passage 1 doesn't address the ideas in her poems, E.
Long Reading Passages
17. E. Most of the first paragraph deals with what has been "often assumed" about bilingual ballots but which is
untrue. The author attempts to respond to objections about the high costs and bilingual ballots on demand by
pointing out what the costs are and what rules govern the qualifications for bilingual ballots.
18 . D. Because the rules specify that a language group must make up "more than 5 percent of the local population,"
choice B would not qualify. The minorities who might qualify are Hispanic, Asian, and Native Americans, so choices
A and C will not qualify. Choice E is disqualified because the group does not have a "below average" rate of "voter
turnout." An Asian minority of 12 percent would qualify if it had a below-average voter turnout and English literacy.
19 . C. The phrase refers to voting, a "fundamental right" of all citizens, which is the means the people have to preserve
all their other rights. A watchful public seeing that a candidate or a law may limit its rights can vote against that
candidate or law. Some of the other answers may be true, but they are not the point of the phrase in the passage.
20. D. In lines 25-33, the passage explains that a condition of the V oting Rights Act was the suspension of literacy
tests for foreign-language speakers whose "predominant classroom language was other than English" who had
completed six grades in an American school.
21. B. The second paragraph refers to laws intended to exclude voters who were Hispanic (line 36), African
American (line 28), Yiddish speakers (line 39), and nonspeakers of English (lines 33-36) but makes no reference
to Irish Catholics, who would presumably be English-speaking whites.
22. C. As it is used in line 40, the word "franchise" means the right to vote, the central issue in the passage.
23. A. The phrase "a hollow gesture" means an action with no consequence, a useless motion, an empty gesture.
Choice A is the best of the five definitions.
Part II: Practice-Review-Analyze-Practice
24. B. The second statement is a responsible reply to the argument that all bilingual voting materials should be
abolished. Granting that some discrimination may now exist, it argues that by repeal of the laws, those who are
injured now would not be helped and those who are now enfranchised would lose their votes. The first statement,
even if true, is not an argument against bilingual voting. The third statement, if true, would support the argument
against bilingual voting.
25. A. If everyone starts from the same position, equal treatment should be the fairest way. If some groups start with
a serious disadvantage, however, equal treatment will simply preserve the disadvantage. Therefore, to achieve
equality, those groups who have not had a head start need to be helped more to catch up.
26. C. The fourth paragraph deals with the disadvantage of non-English-speaking white Europeans (save Hispanics).
The only example of the white non-Hispanic European on this list is C, the Greek.
27. E. The final paragraph suggests all three. If only one in nearly seven thousand fails the literacy-in-English test,
the test must be seriously flawed. Questions like "Why not make every effort to eliminate language barriers to
voting?" call for the reader's assent, and "Perhaps it should" suggests that "need" should be taken into account in
determining who should have a bilingual ballot.
28. E. As the last paragraph makes clear, the author of this passage favors liberalizing the laws to make bilingual
ballots more available. The author would, you can be sure, strongly disapprove of a movement that attempted to
restrict or abolish the use of bilingual ballots in American elections.
Section 7: Mathematics
1. C. Because x3
6= , cross multiplying gives
Therefore, x 1 2
1-= -= -cm
2. D.
== = =
Therefore, the reciprocal of .
is the reciprocal of 27
5 , or 5
3. D. Since Harmon's sports car averages 35 miles for each gallon of gas, on 12 gallons, he'll be able to drive
4. A. ∠ BCD = ∠ A + ∠ B (exterior angle of a triangle equals the sum of the opposite two).
5. D. Using the probability formula
probability total number of chances
number of lucky chances=
The chance of choosing a weekday = 7 total days
5 weekdays
5= .
6. B. Reynold's average score was 24.8, and Doe's average score was 13.7. Therefore, 24.8 - 13.7 = 11.1.
7. E. If y is a positive even integer, y could be 2. Choices A, B, C, and D are all evenly divisible by 2. Only choice
E, y + 1, which is 3, is not evenly divisible by 2. Since E will always be an odd number, if y is even, it would
never be divisible by an even number.
Practice Test 3
Practice Test 3
8. D. A rectangular solid consists of six rectangular faces. This one in particular has two 7 × 6, two 6 × 3, and two
7 × 3 rectangles with areas of 42, 18, and 21, respectively. Therefore, the total surface area will be
9. D. Since each term of the sequence is one more than twice the preceding term, the sixth term of the sequence is
Or you might have noticed the difference between each number and solved it as follows:
10 . E. Total number of different combinations ("how many different kinds") is found by multiplying the number
of ways for each item. Therefore, three different breads times four different meats times three different cheeses =
11. D. Try it yourself with scissors and a square piece of paper.
12 . C. Distance = rate × time.
d = rt
k = rn
r = nkcm miles per hour
Therefore, d = rt
d nk x nkx==c ^m h
13 . B. Using the distance formula,
dx x y y 12 12
=- + -
^ _h i
The endpoints of the radius are (-3, 4) and (0, 0),
r
r
=- - +-
hh
hh
14 . E. Because there are many different rectangles with a diagonal of 16, the lengths of the sides cannot be
determined, and therefore the area of the rectangle cannot be determined.
15 . D. First change the expression by removing the negative exponent.
a
bb
a
b
b
b
b
b
b
b
b
Since
and
x
x
xx
x
=+ =+
=+ =-
=+ -
- + -
Part II: Practice-Review-Analyze-Practice
Section 8: Critical Reading
Long Reading Passages
1. B. Mike Nichols is the director of the film based on the novel The Graduate, by Charles Webb. The critic prefers
Nichols's film to Webb's novel.
2. B. To "play down" is to minimize, to reduce the importance of. To exclude goes one step further.
3. C. The critic suggests that there are several limitations in the characterization of Ben Braddock in the novel; it is,
in fact, its "main trouble." Since Nichols's film avoids or mitigates these faults, the film is better than the book.
Though the phrase criticizes Webb's hero, it does not accuse Salinger's novel of being overgrown and outdated.
4. D. The word "bumptious" means arrogant, offensively conceited. It is not related to the word "bumpkin," which
means yokel.
5. D. The critic says Ben's arriving at the wedding too late to prevent the final vows and then running away with the
bride "shatters . . . a monogamous mythology" of an "entire genre of Hollywood movies."
6. A. The Graduate, according to Passage 1, is the story of a passage from a premature maturity to an innocence
regained, an idealism reconfirmed, a passage made possible by love.
7. C. Although the author of the passage would probably agree with A, B, and D, the first paragraph is about why
people go to movies that are talked about, even though they may expect them to be bad. They go not to see a good
movie but to find out what everyone is talking about.
8. A. The critic in an unflattering remark about the taste of the mass audience says (lines 91-94) that Benjamin
"has nothing to communicate, which is just what makes him an acceptable hero for the large movie audience."
Brains, the passage implies, are not box-office.
9. B. Nichols's "gift" (which the critic puts in ironic quotation marks) is his talent, his singular ability.
10 . D. The line is a denigration of the director. Nichols has no point of view of his own, the passage suggests; he
anticipates just what an audience wants and gives that to them. His object is the "surefire response" and nothing
more.
11. A. The last paragraph of Passage 2 finds sociological interest in the success of the film because it reveals that an
educated generation is just as sentimental and self-satisfied as older generations who doted on romance in film.
12 . C. Choices A, B, D, and E are essentially the same; they are complaining of moviegoers who identify too
intensely with the heroes or heroines of film and see films only as emotional reflections of their own lives, not as
works of art, or craft, or fiction. Choice C describes a critic who sees a film objectively, who does not became so
emotionally involved that he cannot separate reality from cinema.
13 . E. Both critics imply that Ben's parents are caricatures. The first refers to the "overdone caricatures that surround
the three principals" (lines 53-54) and the second to the "middle-class comic strip" (lines 90-91). Both critics use
the word "predatory" to describe the older woman (lines 25 and 101). Both see Ben as an exemplar of innocence
(lines 50, 100, 118-120), although the first praises this aspect of the film, and the second regards it as trite.
Short Reading Passages
14 . E. By referring to an article written in 1880, the author of the passage suggests that recognition of synesthesia is
not recent. However, the article cited doesn't "show the importance" of the concept, A. Also, nothing indicates
that Galton's article deals with the origin of the word synesthesia, B. Although the passage identifies Galton as
Darwin's cousin, nothing suggests that Darwin himself was interested in the phenomenon, C.
15 . C. A is an overstatement. (Beware of words like "identical" in multiple-choice questions.) Similarly, B and D are
unwarranted generalizations and E is a hypothesis not touched upon in the passage.
Practice Test 3
Practice Test 3
Section 9: Mathematics
1. D. The perimeter of a rectangle is equal to the sum of the dimensions of its sides. For this rectangle,
perimeter = 6l + 4w + 6l + 4w
= 6l + 6l + 4w + 4w
= 12l + 8w
2. A. Remember the order of operations.
-- = --
=- -
$$ $
3. D. The average is the sum of the numbers divided by 3. First, get a common denominator, then divide by 3.
++ = + +
cc mm
4. D. First, take the square root of .04, which is .2.
y
y
y
y
5. B. Since m yards = 36m inches and n feet = 12n inches, m yards and n feet =
(36m + 12n) inches.
6. D. First multiply each side by x2 + 4.
x
xx
x
xx xx
xx x
xx x
xx xx x
x
x
x
x
x
-+ =
-+ += +
-+ = +
-+ = +
-+- = +-
-+-=-
-= -
- = -
ii
i
Part II: Practice-Review-Analyze-Practice
7. A. The center of the circle is the midpoint of its diameter.
The coordinates of the center of the circle are:
,, ,2
13-+ - + = - =-cc c mmm
8. B.
+ = +
^h
Or
+ =+
The area of the smaller circle is π(82) = 64π
The ratio of the shaded region area to the area of the larger circle is π
10 . C. Since the first digit cannot be 0, there are 9 possibilities for the first digit (1-9).
For the second and third digits there are 10 possibilities (0-9).
Since the number must be divisible by 5, the last digit must be 0 or 5, and there are only two possibilities for the
last digit.
Therefore, the total number of possible four-digit numbers is 9 × 10 × 10 × 2 = 1800.
Grid-In Questions
11. Answer: 66.2. Because F = C5
9 32+ and C = 19,
Y X
Practice Test 3
Practice Test 3
12 . Answer: 3
. The total combination of red, green, and white jelly beans is made up of 5 + 4 + 3 = 12 parts.
Since the green jelly beans make up 4 parts of the total 12 parts, the portion of green jelly beans in the
combination is 12
13 . Answer: 143. Since the width of the frame is 1 2
inches, the dimensions of the rectangle containing both the
frame and the picture are
width 8 1 2
1 11 inches=+ + =
1 13 inches=+ + =
The area of this rectangle is the product of its base times its height. So
area = bh = (11)(13) = 143 square inches
14 . Answer: 15. Numeration is 10%, and algebra is 30%, which means that there should be three times as many
algebra problems. If there are 5 numeration problems, there should be
5 × 3 = 15 algebra problems
15 . Answer: 45. x + y = 180° (x plus y forms a straight line, or straight angle). Since y = 3x, substituting gives
16 . Answer: 5
. Since 150% of y is equal to 60% of z,
Multiplying both sides of the equation by the LCD of 100 yields
yz
yz
z
y
z
z
z
y
z
y
cc mm
Part II: Practice-Review-Analyze-Practice
17. Answer: 8
. Let n = whole circle. Three-fourths of the circle divided by 6 is
nn
n
n
Therefore, each piece will be 8
of the whole circle.
18 . Answer: 57.1. There were 4 days (July 10, 11, 14, and 15) on which the maximum temperature exceeded the
average. Therefore, 7
19 . Answer: 3.75. Let x = number of days to complete the job working together. The first person will complete x/6
part of the job in x days, and the other person will complete x/10 part of the job in x days. Since they complete the
job in x days working together,
xx
Multiplying both sides of the equation by 30 yields
xx
xx
x
x
x
c ^^m hh
Therefore, it will take the two people 3.75 days to complete the job working together.
20. Answer: 9
. Let x = numerator of original fraction and y = denominator of original fraction.
Therefore, yx xy3
2and== .
The new fraction is
y
x
Since xy 3
2= xy
xy
yy
yy
y
y
-= +
-= +
-= +
c
h i
m
Therefore, xy 3
2 96== = c ^m h
and the original fraction is yx
Practice Test 3
Practice Test 3
Section 1 0: Writing-Multiple Choice
Improving Sentences
1. B. The sentence presents a series of three parts in chronological order. The first and third parts of the series use
indicative verbs in the past tense, but the second element is subordinated in A, C, D, and E. To keep the three
parts parallel, there should be no "when," "while," or "whence," and the verb should be in the past tense to
maintain the parallel ("was educated," "emigrated," "became").
2. B. All four of the erring versions of this sentence have a vague pronoun ("they" or "them" in E). They who? B is
the clearest and the briefest sentence.
3. A. The original sentence is correct. The two independent clauses are separated by the semicolon. A period would
also work here, but a comma or no punctuation at all will produce a comma splice or a run-on sentence.
4. C. In this section of the exam, when all of a long sentence is underlined, there is a good chance that the problem
being tested is the placement of a modifier. Here the phrase "affecting one-fifth of the adult population" modifies
"illiteracy." The good answer will find a way to keep the two together. D keeps the two together, but misplaces
"yearly" so that it appears to modify "affecting" rather than "costs." E also misplaces "yearly."
5. E. This is a sentence fragment, with two participles but no main verb. A, B, and C retain the participle "depicting"
but do not supply a main verb. D adds a verb but the participle "placed" now modifies "dance." E has the two
required main verbs.
6. D. There are two complete sentences here, run together with no punctuation between them. They should be
punctuated as two sentences with a period after fire, or with a semicolon, as in choice D.
7. A. The three elements of the series here should be kept parallel. Choice A uses three gerunds. B, C, and E are not
parallel; D is wordier than A.
8. C. In choices A, D, and E, the pronoun "he" could refer to either Arun Shourie or the Prime Minister's son. B
and C avoid this ambiguity. The sequence of verb tenses is clearer in C; by placing the exposure before the job
loss, B suggests that the first action was the cause of the second.
9. E. The pronouns ("this" and "which") in A, B, C, and D have no specific antecedent; E avoids this vagueness by
adding the noun "fact."
10 . E. This sentence uses a pronoun with no specific antecedent, and tries to correct the error by changing the
pronoun; neither "which" nor "this" will work, but eliminating the pronoun eliminates the error.
11. C. With the correlatives "both . . . and," the same structure should follow each conjunction. Since A and B begin
with "both used," the "and" should be followed by a verb, not the pronoun "it." D never completes the "both"
with an "and." E uses "both . . . and" correctly (to introduce adjectives that are parallel), but it is a very wordy
sentence, four words longer than C. C avoids a lot of trouble simply by not using "both . . . and."
12 . C. The issues in this sentence are the agreement of the verb and pronoun with the subject "group" and the phrase
"where . . . in." Since "group" refers to a single unit, we should take it to be singular and use the singular "has
ignored" and "it." In the phrase "the city where in" the "in" is unnecessary.
13 . D. The sentence is testing parallel elements in a series. The series could use three nouns or three clauses beginning
with "that" or three gerunds to keep the parallelism, though the "that" clauses would be wordy. None of the wrong
answers uses all three consistently, but D uses three nouns ("eagerness," "willingness," and "refusal").
14 . C. The phrase "is no different from" is another way of saying "is like." Comparisons, whether negative ("not
different") or not, should be kept as parallel as possible. Here we need a parallel to the gerund "understanding.''
The addition of subject ("you") and verbs in A, B, D, or E is unnecessary. The parallel is the most concise choice,
the gerund "seeing."
15 . C. This is a sentence fragment. Introduced by "where," it is a dependent clause. The change to "when," or "if," or
"while" does not make the clause independent. C rightly drops the subordinating conjunction, and the sentence is
now complete.
Part II: Practice-Review-Analyze-Practice
SAT Score Range Approximator
The following charts are designed to give you only a very approximate score range, not an exact score. When you take
the actual new SAT, you will see questions similar to those in this book; however, some questions may be slightly easier
or more difficult. Needless to say, this may affect your scoring range.
Because one section of the new SAT is experimental (it doesn't count toward your score), for the purposes of this
approximation, do not count Section 9. Remember: On the actual test, the experimental section could appear anywhere
on your test.
How to Approximate Your Score in Critical Reading
1. Add the total number of correct responses for the three Critical Reading sections. Remember, for the purposes of
this approximation, do not count Section 9.
2. Add the total number of incorrect responses (only those attempted or marked in) for those sections.
3. The total number of incorrect responses for the Critical Reading sections should be divided by 4, giving you an
adjustment factor (round off to the nearest whole number, if necessary).
4. Subtract this adjustment factor from the total number of correct responses to obtain a raw score.
5. This raw score is then scaled to a range from 200 to 800.
Example:
If the total number of correct answers is 40 out of a possible 70
and 20 problems were attempted but missed,
dividing 20 by 4 gives an adjustment factor of 5.
Subtracting this adjustment factor of 5 from the original 40 correct gives a raw score of 35.
This raw score is then scaled to a range from 200 to 800.
6. Using your scores:
correct answers wrong answers ÷ 4 raw score
7. Use the following table to match your raw score for Critical Reading and the corresponding approximate score
range:
Raw Score Approximate Score Range
Keep in mind that this is only an approximate score range.
Part II: Practice-Review-Analyze-Practice
How to Approximate Your Score in Mathematics
1. Add the total number of correct responses for the three Mathematics sections. Remember, for the purposes of
this approximation, do not count Section 9.
2. Add the total number of incorrect responses for the multiple-choice questions only.
3. The total number of incorrect responses for the multiple-choice questions should be divided by 4, giving you an
adjustment factor (round off to the nearest whole number).
4. Subtract this adjustment factor from the total number of correct responses to obtain a raw score.
5. This raw score is then scaled to a range from 200 to 800.
Example:
If the total number of correct answers is 30 out of a possible 55
and 16 multiple-choice problems were attempted but missed,
dividing 16 by 4 gives an adjustment factor of 4.
Subtracting this adjustment factor of 4 from the original 30 correct gives a raw score of 26.
This raw score is then scaled to a range from 200 to 800.
Note: No deduction is made for incorrect grid-in responses.
6. Using your scores:
Total correct answers wrong answers on multiple choice ÷ 4 raw score
7. Use the following table to match your raw score for Mathematics and the corresponding approximate score range:
Raw Score Approximate Score Range
Keep in mind that this is only an approximate score range.
How to Approximate Your Score in Writing
Although the scoring techniques for the actual new SAT Writing sections are very precise, this rough method should
give you a very general indication of your scoring range.
Let's start with the Writing Multiple-Choice sections.
1. Add the total number of correct responses for the two Writing Multiple-Choice sections.
2. Add the total number of incorrect responses for the multiple-choice questions.
3. The total number of incorrect responses for the multiple-choice questions should be divided by 4, giving you an
adjustment factor (round off to the nearest whole number).
4. Subtract this adjustment factor from the total number of correct responses to obtain the Writing Multiple-Choice
raw score.
5. This raw score is then scaled as a writing multiple-choice sub-score from 20 to 80.
Example:
If your essay is scored a 4, then multiply that number by 4 to give you an approximate essay score of 16.
If the total number of correct multiple-choice answers is 30 out of a possible 50
and 12 multiple-choice problems were attempted but missed,
dividing 12 by 4 gives an adjustment factor of 3.
Subtracting this adjustment factor of 3 from the original 30 correct gives a multiple-choice raw score
This raw score of 27 would then be scaled as a writing multiple-choice sub-score from 20 to 80.
6. Using your multiple-choice score:
correct answers wrong answers ÷ 4 raw score
7. Use the following table to match your score for the multiple choice and the corresponding approximate sub-score
range:
Raw Score Approximate Sub-Score Range
Now let's look at the Writing Essay.
1. Have an English teacher, tutor, or someone else with good writing skills read and evaluate your essay using the
Essay Checklist given after the practice exam.
2. Have your reader evaluate the complete essay as generally good, fair, or poor and give the essay a score of 5, 3, or 1.
3. Remember this is only a very general approximation. On the actual test, your essay will be graded by two readers
who are trained to score the essay from 1 (lowest) to 6 (highest). Totaling the two readers' scores will give a sub-
score of 2-12.
Now let's look at the composite Writing score from 200 to 800.
Use the chart below with your approximate essay score and your multiple-choice raw score to approximate your score
range.
Approximate Essay Score
Multiple-choice
Keep in mind that this is only an approximate score range. 389
SAT Score Range Approximator
ABAB OOUT THUT TH E E
PSAPSAT/T/ NNMMSSQTQT
P ART III
Introduction to the PSAT/NMSQT
General Format of PSAT/NMSQT
Section 1 Critical Reading 23 Questions
25 Minutes Sentence Completion 6 Questions
Short Reading Passages 4 Questions
Long Reading Passages 1 3 Questions
Section 2 Mathematics 20 Questions
25 Minutes Multiple Choice 20 Questions
Section 3 Critical Reading 25 Questions
25 Minutes Sentence Completion 7 Questions
Short Reading Passages 8 Questions
Long Reading Passages 1 0 Questions
Section 4 Mathematics 18 Questions
25 Minutes Multiple Choice 8 Questions
Grid-ins 1 0 Questions
Section 5 Writing Skills 39 Questions
30 Minutes Improving Sentences 20 Questions
Identifying Sentence Errors 1 4 Questions
Improving Paragraphs 5 Questions
Total Time 2 hours and 1 0 minutes Approximately 1 25 Questions
Note: The order of the sections and the number of questions per section may vary.
General Description
The Preliminary Scholastic Assessment Test/National Merit Scholarship Qualifying Test (PSAT/NMSQT) is outstanding
practice for taking the SAT. By taking the PSAT/NMSQT, students also compete for national scholarships, get a good
sense of their strengths and weaknesses in preparing for the SAT, and get mail from colleges. The PSAT/NMSQT is
given in October and is usually taken by high school juniors. To get information about registering for this exam, contact
your high school counselor.
The test lasts 2 hours and 10 minutes and consists of two Critical Reading sections (containing sentence completions,
questions from short reading passages, and questions from long reading passages), two Math sections (containing
multiple-choice and grid-in questions), and one Writing Skills section (containing sentence error identification,
sentence improvement, and paragraph improvement questions).
The Critical Reading sections test your ability to read and comprehend and to understand words in context.
Part III: About the PSAT/NMSQT
The Math sections test your mathematical reasoning ability by asking you to solve problems and word problems in
arithmetic, algebra, and geometry.
The Writing Skills section tests your ability to use standard written English to find errors in usage and structure and to
choose effective revisions in sentences and paragraphs.
The Critical Reading, math, and writing questions each generate scores of 20 through 80. When you receive your score
reports, you will get the three separate scores and two estimates of what your scores might be on the SAT.
The problems are slightly graduated in difficulty within each question type, except for critical reading, which is not in
order of difficulty. You receive a penalty for incorrect answers, so don't guess unless you can eliminate at least one
choice. On math grid-ins, you receive no penalty for guessing.
Additional information and sample problems are available on the Internet, at www.psat.org.
Critical Reading, Math, and Writing Skills Sections
The SAT strategies, techniques, and sample problems given in the introductory sections of this guide also apply to the
PSAT/NMSQT. The sentence completion, and critical reading approaches should be reviewed carefully as the basis for
your verbal review (review pages 11-38). In the math sections, reviewing the approaches for SAT multiple-choice
math and grid-ins will be very helpful (review pages 42-81). In the writing skills section, reviewing the multiple choice
writing skills introduction (review pages 101-126) should give you a good understanding of what to expect and how to
approach different problem types.
Answer Sheets for PSAT/NMSQT Practice Test
(Remove These Sheets and Use Them to Mark Your Answers)
Section 1 Section 2 Section 3 Section 4
Section 4 (continued)
.. .
.. .
.. .
.. .
A EDCB
A EDCB
A EDCB
A EDCB
A EDCB
A EDCB
A EDCB
A EDCB
A EDCB
A EDCB
A EDCB
A EDCB
A EDCB
A EDCB
A EDCB
A EDCB
A EDCB
A EDCB
A EDCB
A EDCB
A EDCB
A EDCB
A EDCB
A EDCB
A EDCB
A EDCB
A EDCB
A EDCB
A EDCB
A EDCB
A EDCB
A EDCB
A EDCB
A EDCB
A EDCB
A EDCB
A EDCB
A EDCB
A EDCB
A EDCB
A EDCB
A EDCB
A EDCB
A EDCB
A EDCB
A EDCB
A EDCB
A EDCB
A EDCB
A EDCB
A EDCB
A EDCB
A EDCB
A EDCB
A EDCB
A EDCB
A EDCB
A EDCB
A EDCB
A EDCB
A EDCB
A EDCB
A EDCB
A EDCB
A EDCB
A EDCB
A EDCB
A EDCB
A EDCB
A EDCB
A EDCB
A EDCB
A EDCB
A EDCB
A EDCB
A EDCB
Section 4 (continued)
Section 5
A EDCB
A EDCB
A EDCB
A EDCB
A EDCB
A EDCB
A EDCB
A EDCB
A EDCB
A EDCB
A EDCB
A EDCB
A EDCB
A EDCB
A EDCB
A EDCB
A EDCB
A EDCB
A EDCB
A EDCB
A EDCB
A EDCB
A EDCB
A EDCB
A EDCB
A EDCB
A EDCB
A EDCB
A EDCB
A EDCB
A EDCB
A EDCB
A EDCB
A EDCB
A EDCB
A EDCB
A EDCB
A EDCB
A EDCB
.. .
.. .
.. .
.. .
.. .
.. .
PSAT/NMSQT Practice Test
Section 1: Critical Reading
Time: 25 Minutes
23 Questions
In this section, choose the best answer for each question and blacken the corresponding space on the answer sheet.
Directions: Each blank in the following sentences indicates that something has been omitted. Consider the lettered
words beneath the sentence and choose the word or set of words that best fits the whole sentence.
EXAMPLE:
continent.
A. impoverished
B. successful
C. populous
D. developed
E. militant
The correct answer is C.
a bed or a chair to a man or a woman.
A. sacred
B. expensive
C. inanimate
D. impractical
E. effete
2. By equating dog owners who violate leash laws
with smokers, the city hopes to persuade dog
owners that it is inconsiderate, unhealthy, and even
A. salubrious
B. shameful
C. ambiguous
D. edifying
E. mordant
3. For their patients who could not sleep, Victorian
doctors commonly prescribed drugs made chiefly
from opium with little or no concern for the
A. tonic . . . opiates
B. addictive . . . narcotics
C. perilous . . . placebos
D. soporific . . . remedies
E. somnolent . . . prescriptions
4. Though Europe has merged its currencies, there
different official languages are now used to
operate the European Union.
A. linguistic
B. financial
C. commercial
D. political
E. religious
GO ON TO THE NEXT PAGE
have caused a record number of floods, and the
number of homes built too close to the rivers.
A. minimal . . . increased
B. scant . . . maximized
C. massive . . . diminished
D. average . . . intensified
E. unprecedented . . . augmented
that shocked the visitors to the museum, was to
Renaissance paintings and abstract 20th-century
sculpture.
A. conventional . . . confine
B. unusual . . . exclude
C. conservative . . . combine
D. audacious . . . juxtapose
E. gauche . . . conceal
Part III: About the PSAT/NMSQT
Questions 7-8 are based on the following passage.
In the 18th and 19th centuries, patent-medicine
men traveled across the United States selling magi-
cal tonics and miracle cures without any interference
from government regulations. In fact, in 1793,
Congress passed laws that permitted patent-medi-
cine manufacturers to protect their formulas, regard-
less of whether they worked or were demonstrably
safe. Then, in 1906, the Pure Food and Drug Act was
passed, which allowed a government agency-the
precursor of the Food and Drug Administration-to
ensure that medicine labels contained no false or
misleading claims. Although this ended the glory
days of snake-oil salesmen, since then new regula-
tions of patent medicines have come about only as a
result of disasters that outrage the public.
7. According to the paragraph, before the 20th
century, which of the following was most helpful
to patent-medicine manufacturers?
A. an illiterate public
B. a weak Congress
C. no government regulation
D. highly trained salesmen
E. lack of scientific knowledge
8. The last sentence of the paragraph suggests that
A. more regulation of patent medicines may
occur in the future.
B. more patent medicines are sold today than in
the past.
C. people are confused by the claims of patent-
medicine manufacturers.
D. no regulation of patent medicine has
occurred since l906.
E. Congress has become the watchdog of patent
medicines.
Questions 9-10 are based on the following passage.
In 1833 Charles Babbage, a British mathemati-
cian, designed an "analytical engine" a steam-driven
machine as big as a train. It contained all the main
elements of the modern computer: input devices,
memory ("store"), a computing unit ("mill"), a
control unit, and output devices. Unfortunately,
Babbage never built his engine. Under the best cir-
cumstances, the limitations of Newtonian physics
might have prevented him, but one of his greatest
obstacles was not considering that information can-
not be moved between "mill" and "store" without
leaking, like faulty sacks of flour. An even greater
obstacle may have been his impatience and lack of
diplomacy, which partly accounted for his inability
to get sufficient government funding. But his design
does prefigure the logical structure of the modern
computer, and he has been called the "father of
computing."
9. The terms "store" and "mill" indicate that Babbage
A. had a unique imagination.
B. used language familiar to the period in which
he worked.
C. lacked a complete knowledge of Newtonian
physics.
D. had an imperfect understanding of computer
logic.
E. chose terminology to appeal to the working
class.
10 . According to the passage, which of the following
was most responsible for Babbage's inability to
build his "analytical engine"?
A. insufficient funding
B. criticism from other mathematicians
C. a limited education
D. impatience
E. the engine's massive size
PSAT/NMSQT Practice Test
PSAT/NMSQT Practice Test
GO ON TO THE NEXT PAGE
Directions: Questions follow the passages below. Using only the stated or implied information in the passage and in its
introduction, if any, answer the questions.
Questions 11-16 are based on the following passage.
In the early 1980s, as scientists were perfecting
techniques for splicing foreign genes into bacteria,
some investigators began suggesting ways to use
the technology to benefit the environment. For in-
stance, they proposed that genetically engineered
bacteria might be deployed for such tasks as clean-
ing oil spills or protecting crops from predation and
disease. But the enterprise, known as environmen-
tal biotechnology, soon came under fire.
Then, as now, the proposals elicited concern that
the altered microbes might run amok or that their
genes would hop unpredictably to other organisms-
a phenomenon termed "horizontal" gene transfer (to
distinguish it from the "vertical" transfer occurring
between a parent and its offspring). Such activities, it
was feared, might somehow irreparably harm the en-
vironment, animals, or people. Some observers even
issued dire warnings that the unnatural organisms
would destroy the earth. No longer were tabloids
worried about attacks by "killer tomatoes" from
outer space; now the danger was homegrown-
genetically altered microorganisms that would eat the
environment.
Unfortunately, at the time, biologists had little
solid information on which to base responses. They
knew almost nothing about the fate of genetically
engineered microbes in nature and about the
propensity of innate or introduced bacterial genes
to migrate to new hosts. That paucity of data is now
being remedied, thanks to unprecedented coopera-
tion between genetic researchers and microbial
ecologists, who study microorganisms in their nor-
mal habitats.
Today at least two strains of genetically engi-
neered bacteria have gained approval (for agricul-
tural use) by the U.S. Environmental Protection
Agency, and dozens of field trials have been con-
ducted. Those trials and more general investiga-
tions of gene transfer between bacteria in their
natural habitats indicate that genetically manipu-
lated bacteria themselves are unlikely to proliferate
out of control. They tend to be fragile and to die out
relatively quickly instead of persisting indefinitely;
for that reason, their genes probably do not have
much opportunity to spread.
Yet under certain circumstances, the genes can
potentially find their way into other bacteria or
even into other types of organisms. A key to the
safe release of the microbes, then, is to identify the
conditions that will encourage or deter specific
bacteria from transferring their genes to other or-
ganisms. With such information in hand, biologists
can select bacteria that will be least likely to ex-
change genes with organisms in the particular site
being "treated." As an example, for release into a
lake, biotechnologists might be able to choose a
bacterial species that does not readily exchange its
genes in water.
11. The author's purpose in this passage is to
A. advise a moratorium on research in the field
of environmental biotechnology.
B. show that fears of gene swapping are
groundless and that critics have reacted
hysterically.
C. explain the difference between "horizontal"
and "vertical" gene swapping.
D. show that research indicates that genetically
altered bacteria may be safely used in nature
under certain conditions.
E. describe the types of research being conducted
in the field of environmental technology.
12 . According to the passage, critics of environmental
biotechnology have been most concerned that
introducing altered microbes into the environment
will
A. lead to uncontrolled gene transfer.
B. interfere with normal vertical transfer.
C. create new species.
D. eliminate endangered species.
E. transfer human disease to other animals.
13 . In line 28, "propensity" most nearly means
A. propriety.
B. inclination.
C. desire.
D. ability.
E. reliability.
Part III: About the PSAT/NMSQT
Directions: Questions follow each of the passages below. Using only the stated or implied information in each passage
and in its introduction, if any, answer the questions.
14 . Which of the following is the most promising
safeguard against proliferation of altered bacteria
in the environment?
A. the reluctance of the U.S. Environmental
Protection Agency to approve their use
B. the tendency of altered bacteria to be short-
lived
C. the ability of normal micro-organisms to
resist gene transfer
D. the exclusive use of bacterial species that
don't exchange genes in water
E. the greater strength of "vertical" gene transfer
15 . According to the passage, genetically manipulated
bacteria might be useful in preserving the
environment by
A. attacking plant diseases.
B. altering unstable ecosystems.
C. preventing oil spills.
D. eliminating the weakest members of a species.
E. producing larger fruits and vegetables.
16 . The author of the passage implies all of the
following EXCEPT
A. people often react fearfully to new
technologies.
B. the possible benefits of using manipulated
bacteria for ecological purposes are not
worth the risks.
C. research is needed to identify conditions that
will discourage gene transfer in various
environments.
D. genetic researchers have been willing to
participate in finding safe applications for
their research.
E. the fragility of genetically manipulated
bacteria reduces the possibility of their
spreading unpredictably to other organisms.
Questions 17-23 are based on the following paired
passages.
The following passages concern women in science, the
first in the 19th century, the second in the latter half of
the 20th century.
The first passage follows a description of the lack of
opportunities for African Americans in science during
the 19th century.
Passage 1
Less oppressive, but in some ways analogous,
was the lot of American women. As in the case of
whites over blacks, men rationalized the denial of
opportunity by stereotyping the victims as inher-
ently unfit for it. God and nature made women to
raise families and adorn society (or "man" the fac-
tories), most men liked to believe. Intellectual pur-
suits were manifestly outside women's sphere. For
a woman to aspire to serious scientific work was
deemed especially grotesque, unseemly, hopeless,
and impermissible.
Yet there were rents in the crinoline 1 curtain.
Mothers, after all, raised sons, who might benefit
from a home atmosphere of polite learning and in-
formed reverence for God's work in nature. So no
outcry arose when, in the second quarter of the
nineteenth century, genteel girls and women took
up science as a polite study rather than as prepara-
tion for a career. Female academies and seminaries,
like their male counterparts in those years, added a
variety of science courses and even invested in ex-
pensive telescopes, physical and chemical appara-
tus, and natural history collections. Many sought to
equal the quality of courses at men's schools,
though no women's school achieved a full range of
college-level science courses until 1865. A few
such schools could draw on nearby male profes-
sional scientists of some eminence for occasional
lectures.
Science reached women outside the classroom
also. Many women attended the public lectures on
science that were especially popular in the 1830s
and 1840s. Both men and women wrote popular
books and magazine articles on science for the
growing women's market. Women wrote ten such
books on botany alone from 1819-1859. From the
late 1820s to the early 1870s, Mrs. Almira Phelps
sold more than a quarter-million copies of her
Familiar Lectures on Botany, the most popular of
her books on science for children, drawing mostly
on a few serious books by others. Several women,
notwithstanding stereotypes, liked insects well
enough to write popular yet knowledgeable articles
on entomology.
1 A woman's petticoat made from a stiff fabric.
PSAT/NMSQT Practice Test
PSAT/NMSQT Practice Test
GO ON TO THE NEXT PAGE
Passage 2
Science has a vested interest in the idea of the
intellectual meritocracy. It is important to scientists
to believe that they act rationally, that they do not
distort or ignore evidence, that neither their work
nor their profession is seriously influenced by poli-
tics, ambition, or prejudice.
Such, clearly, cannot be the case. Scientists, like
all other people, make decisions on the basis of a
shared social reality, are pulled about by convic-
tions rooted in emotional prejudice, act on inherited
ideas of what is natural, and are certainly influenced
by politics, ambition, and issues of class, sex, and
race. But, as they have a strong need to believe they
are guided by intellectual objectivity, they have a
more difficult time than other kinds of workers do
in perceiving themselves as discriminatory.
Thus, the atmosphere in which women in sci-
ence have been held back, put off, discouraged and
demoralized, and frozen in position is particularly
disturbing because of its defensive denial that what
is happening is happening. In business, a woman
looks into the eyes of a corporation executive who
says openly to her, "We know what you're all about,
we've held you off as long as we could, and now
you'll have to take us to court to get what you
want." In science, a woman looks into the eyes of a
man who thinks of himself as decent, fair-minded,
above all reasonable, and who says to her, "I really
don't know what you're talking about. Surely
you're not saying we've discriminated against you."
Although one knows that life for women in sci-
ence will not be the same in the next 40 years as it
has been in the last, right now the statistics on
women in science bears out the claim that they are
half in, half out. Yes, there is change and growth
recorded in the statistics, but that growth in real
numbers is small and painfully disproportionate.
Between 1978 and 1980, employment of women in
science and engineering increased over five times
faster than employment of men. Despite this growth,
women represented about 13 percent of all em-
ployed scientists and engineers, and in real numbers
the total employment for men in scientific and engi-
neering fields was computed at 2,245,300 while for
women it was 314,800. The statistical picture for
women in science is graphic and sobering.
17. In line 12, "rents" most nearly means
A. holes.
B. payments.
C. disputes.
D. exceptions.
E. fissures.
18 . According to the author of Passage 1, women
became involved in science initially because
A. their husbands and fathers wanted them to
improve their minds.
B. they wanted to give deeper meaning to their
lives.
C. they wanted to help provide an atmosphere
of learning at home.
D. they sensed future career possibilities in an
increasingly important field.
E. the prejudice against their participation in
scientific research was rapidly decreasing.
19 . In Passage 2, line 46, "intellectual meritocracy"
most nearly means
A. government managed by intellectuals.
B. a system without discrimination.
C. a system based on intellectual achievement
and ability.
D. government by the best people available.
E. a system that is open to change and
improvement.
20. According to the author of Passage 2, science is
A. a good field for women because of
opportunities to advance.
B. dominated by men who stereotype women as
too emotional to be objective.
C. less rewarding than business because of the
attitudes toward women.
D. influenced by the society's prejudices and
convictions.
E. guided by men whose primary concern is
maintaining the status quo.
Part III: About the PSAT/NMSQT
21. What would be the likely response by the author
of Passage 2 to the information presented in
Passage 1?
A. Prejudice against women in science has in
fact grown stronger in the past 100 years.
B. Because of their achievements, women have
overcome most of the prejudice against them.
C. Attitudes similar to those in the 19th century
continue to influence behavior, even in a
field that is supposed to be immune from
prejudices.
D. Women have made progress in science, but
only because of changes in discrimination
laws.
E. The negative attitude toward women
scientists today is very different from the
negative attitude described in Passage 1.
22. Which of the following best describes the
difference between Passage 1 and Passage 2?
A. In Passage 1, women are described as
enjoying their social roles, whereas in
Passage 2 they are shown to be angry and
rebellious.
B. The women described in Passage 1 are anti-
intellectual, whereas the women described in
Passage 2 are serious and determined.
C. The author of Passage 1 presents facts with
no opinions, and the author of Passage 2
presents opinions with no facts.
D. Passage 1 presents an optimistic view of the
future, and Passage 2 presents a pessimistic
view.
E. The author of Passage 1 presents his subject
historically, whereas the author of Passage 2
is arguing a position.
23. Passage 2 is more concerned than Passage 1 with
A. the social stereotyping of women.
B. male scientists' denial that female scientists
are the objects of discrimination.
C. salary differences between men and women
scientists.
D. the types of scientific work that women must
perform because of discrimination.
E. the difficulties of women scientists torn
between their profession and their families.
PSAT/NMSQT Practice Test
PSAT/NMSQT Practice Test
IF YOU FINISH BEFORE TIME IS CALLED, CHECK YOUR WORK ON THIS
SECTION ONLY . DO NOT WORK ON ANY OTHER SECTION IN THE TEST. STOP
Part III: About the PSAT/NMSQT
Section 2: Mathematics
Time: 25 Minutes
20 Questions
Directions: Solve each problem in this section by using the information given and your own mathematical calcula-
tions, insights, and problem-solving skills. Then select the one correct answer of the five choices given and mark the
corresponding circle on your answer sheet. Use the available space on the page for your scratch work.
Notes
1. All numbers used are real numbers.
2. Calculators may be used.
3. Some problems may be accompanied by figures or diagrams. These figures are drawn as accurately as possible
EXCEPT when it is stated in a specific problem that a figure is not drawn to scale. The figures and diagrams are
meant to provide information useful in solving the problem or problems. Unless otherwise stated, all figures and
diagrams lie in a plane.
Data That Can Be Used for Reference
rectangle
A = lw
Area
triangle
circle
rectangular solid
V = lwh
Volume
right circular cylinder
Pythagorean Relationship
Special T riangles
A circle is composed of 360°
A straight angle measures 180°
The sum of the angles of a triangle is 180°
w
l
h
b
r
M
r
h
l
h
w
a2 + b2 = c 2
C B
A
c
a
b
x
x
1. What is 864,925 rounded to the nearest thousand?
2. If x = 2, then 3x2 + (3x)2 =
3. If (a + b) = -3, then (a + b)3 =
B. -9
C. -6
D. 9
4. If the product of six integers is negative, then at
most how many of the six integers could be
negative?
A. six
B. five
C. four
D. three
E. two
PSAT/NMSQT Practice Test
PSAT/NMSQT Practice Test
GO ON TO THE NEXT PAGE
5. If the sum of three consecutive integers is 141,
what is the largest of the three integers?
6. If z
3 25= , then 5z =
7. If m4 + n4 = 0, what is the value of 9m - 5n?
A. 9
B. 5
C. 4
D. 0
E. -1
8. If Marcos travels at an average speed of 55 miles
per hour, how many hours would it take for him to
travel d miles?
B. d
C. d
D. d + 55
E. d - 55
Part III: About the PSAT/NMSQT
9. If a + 5 = 3b and a = 4b - 11, what is the value
of b?
B. 6
C. -2
D. -6
10 . If the volume of a cube is 64, what is the area of
one face of the cube?
E. 8
Note: Figure not drawn to scale.
11. In the figure above, if n = 50, what is the value
of m?
12 . If x is an integer and 3x + 11 is even, which of the
following must be even?
A. x
B. x + 1
C. x2
D. 2x + 1
E. x3
PSAT/NMSQT Practice Test
PSAT/NMSQT Practice Test
GO ON TO THE NEXT PAGE
13 . If a rectangular box with dimensions z, 2/z, and y
has a volume of 12, what must y equal?
B. 6
C. 4
D. 3
E. 2
14 . What is the value of the ratio of x to y if xy = 21?
A. 21 to 1
B. 7 to 3
C. 3 to 7
D. 1 to 21
E. It cannot be determined from the information
given.
15 . If the diameter of a circle P is 40 percent of the
diameter of circle Q, then the area of circle P is
what percentage of the area of circle Q?
E. It cannot be determined from the information
given.
16 . If x5 = 9 and x6 = y/11, which of the following is an
expression for x in terms of y?
A. y
B. y
C. y
Part III: About the PSAT/NMSQT
17. For how many integer values of x will the value of
the expression 3x - 4 be an integer greater than 4
and less than 250?
Note: Figure not drawn to scale.
18 . In the figure above, if the area of /H17005OXY equals the
area of /H17005WYZ, which of the following are the
coordinates of W?
A. (4, 4)
B. (4, 5)
C. (4, 6)
D. (4, 8)
E. (4, 10)
19 . Tickets numbered from 1 through 50 are placed in
a container, and one ticket will be selected at
random. What is the probability that the ticket
selected will have a number on it divisible by 3?
B. 5
E. 3
20. In the figure above, C and D are the centers of
the two circles, and AD = AE. If the area of the
smaller circle is 100π, what is the area of the
larger circle?
BE
DA C
y
X (0,2)
O
W
Y (3,0) Z (4,0)
x
PSAT/NMSQT Practice Test
PSAT/NMSQT Practice Test
IF YOU FINISH BEFORE TIME IS CALLED, CHECK YOUR WORK ON THIS
SECTION ONLY . DO NOT WORK ON ANY OTHER SECTION IN THE TEST. STOP
24. A kind and very modest philanthropist, Merrill
many worthy causes.
A. cynically
B. commercially
C. blatantly
D. parsimoniously
E. unobtrusively
25. The farmers believed that their crop failures were
caused by the influx of Easterners, so they
newcomers.
A. infringed
B. commuted
C. intensified
D. discouraged
E. exacted
26. Although most of the avalanches in Colorado
no threat to human lives or property, the
counties has greatly increased the danger.
A. obscure . . . decline
B. populated . . . increase
C. remote . . . explosion
D. uninhabited . . . vacuum
E. steep . . . deficiency
27. For almost a century, Maryland and Pennsylvania
quarreled about their border, and even fought
A. skirmishes
B. dissents
C. protests
D. contractions
E. invasions
Part III: About the PSAT/NMSQT
Section 3: Critical Reading
Time: 25 Minutes
25 Questions
In this section, choose the best answer for each question and blacken the corresponding space on the answer sheet.
Directions: Each blank in the following sentences indicates that something has been omitted. Consider the lettered
words beneath the sentence and choose the word or set of words that best fits the whole sentence.
EXAMPLE:
continent.
A. impoverished
B. successful
C. populous
D. developed
E. militant
The correct answer is C.
28. The retiring judge's office shelves were filled with
which he presided.
A. exigencies . . . disclosure
B. verdicts . . . daguerreotype
C. legacies . . . archetype
D. memorabilia . . . memento
E. souvenirs . . . commentary
29. Edgar Lee Masters used to walk through
gravestones to find ideas for his poems.
A. epithets
B. illuminations
C. epigrams
D. illustrations
E. epitaphs
30. Advances in the film industry depend on
photography, projection, processing, recording,
and sound reproduction.
A. pictorial
B. technological
C. cinematic
D. artistic
E. financial
PSAT/NMSQT Practice Test
PSAT/NMSQT Practice Test
GO ON TO THE NEXT PAGE
Questions 31-32 are based on the following passage.
In 1860, a historian wrote that during the Middle
Ages consciousness "lay dreaming or half awake."
A 19th century writer condemned the period as "a
thousand years without a bath." This idea that the
Middle Ages were dominated by gloom, ignorance,
superstition and a lack of progress (and that Europe
was reborn during the Renaissance) has been
largely discredited, though it persists in terms we
still use pejoratively. "Medieval," for example, can
describe everything from cumbersome, antiquated
regulations to barbarous practices of governments
we don't like. And "the Dark Ages," once designat-
ing the Middle Ages, is still around to mean any
primitive stage of development.
31. Which of the following best describes the main
idea of this paragraph?
A. A comparison of the Middle Ages to the
Renaissance
B. A mocking criticism of the view of 19th
century scholars and writers
C. An illustration of the persistence of an
outmoded idea
D. A celebration of the creativity of the
Middle Ages
E. An example of careless use of language
32. Which of the following best defines the word
"pejoratively" as it is used in this paragraph
(line 9)?
A. negatively
B. humorously
C. redundantly
D. ironically
E. skeptically
Questions 33-34 are based on the following passage.
The design of a typewriter (and computer) key-
board is named for the first six letters on the left
side in the top row: QWERTY . Designed in 1873,
the QWERTY keyboard was intended to slow typ-
ists down by scattering the most common letters all
over the rows and putting them mostly on the left
side, where a right-handed typist would have to use
his or her left hand. Were the designers merely be-
ing perverse? In 1873 typewriters jammed if adja-
cent keys were struck in quick succession, and
QWERTY was a solution. Later, when the problem
of jamming had been eliminated and a more effi-
cient keyboard was designed, it was too late. Vested
interests-such as typists and typing teachers-
have successfully quashed any keyboard redesign
for over 60 years.
33. The best definition of "perverse" (line 9) as it is
used in this passage is
A. contrary.
B. immoral.
C. improper.
D. imaginative.
E. short-sighted.
34. Which of the following implications is NOT
supported by the paragraph?
A. Redesign of the QWERTY keyboard would
involve huge costs beyond simply the
manufacture of new keyboards.
B. More people are right-handed than left-
handed.
C. Although the arrangement of the QWERTY
keyboard is not optimal for fast typing, it has
survived for over 60 years.
D. Among other vested interests, the
manufacturers of keyboards would be
opposed to changing keyboard design.
E. The QWERTY keyboard will never be
replaced.
Part III: About the PSAT/NMSQT
Directions: Questions follow the passages below. Using only the stated or implied information in each passage and in
its introduction, if any, answer the questions.
Questions 35-36 are based on the following passage.
In the novel The Mysterious Island, written in
the 1870s, one of Jules Verne's characters predicts
that "water will one day be employed as fuel, that
hydrogen and oxygen . . . used singly or together
will furnish an inexhaustible source of heat and
light." That science-fiction idea may become real-
ity. Fuel cells-in which hydrogen can be used to
produce electricity-are already in place on the
space shuttle and in some large buildings, for ex-
ample, and engineers are working on a variety of
other applications. One use of the fuel cell receiv-
ing great attention is in powering automobiles.
While the Verne character's concern was the dwin-
dling supply of coal, today's is dependence on for-
eign oil and concerns about the environment.
35. The quotation from The Mysterious Island (lines
3-6) serves to
A. introduce the idea of the fuel cell.
B. demonstrate Verne's prophetic writings.
C. explain the impact of fuel shortages.
D. emphasize the value of science fiction.
E. put into perspective environmental concerns.
36. Based on the paragraph, it is likely that the writer
A. advocates the replacement of the internal
combustion engine.
B. opposes battery-powered or hybrid
automobiles.
C. expects automobile makers to reject
hydrogen-powered automobiles.
D. believes fuel cell technology will advance.
E. is primarily concerned with automobile
emissions.
Questions 37-38 are based on the following passage.
In the 19th century, wool was England's most
valuable export, and the General Enclosure Act of
1801 standardized landlords' existing practice of
fencing in open land to graze large herds of sheep.
For example, in 1820 the Duchess of Sutherland
dispossessed 15,000 tenants and replaced them with
131,000 sheep. One of the far-reaching effects of
enclosure was that peasants, who could no longer
use the open lands for their own farming, were dri-
ven into towns and cities. They became paupers
with nothing to sell but their own labor, and that at
whatever price the market offered. Essentially, en-
closure "freed" peasants to become an army of
cheap labor for the Industrial Revolution's grim
new factories.
37. The example in lines 5-7 is used for all of the
following EXCEPT to
A. show the callous nature of the aristocracy.
B. dramatize the effect of enclosure on the
peasants.
C. draw an ironic parallel between the sheep
and the tenants.
D. explain why the General Enclosure Act was
adopted.
E. provide a specific illustration.
38. The word "freed" in line 13 is in quotation marks
because it
A. is used in an informal way.
B. refers to the slave-like position of rural
workers.
C. indicates the irony of the peasants' situation
after enclosure.
D. contrasts the plight of the workers with the
condition of the landlords.
E. is a direct quotation from the General
Enclosure Act of 1801.
PSAT/NMSQT Practice Test
PSAT/NMSQT Practice Test
GO ON TO THE NEXT PAGE
Questions 39-48 are based on the following passage.
Between 1840 and 1924, when the laws restrict-
ing Asian immigration were enacted, thousands of
Chinese, Japanese, and Koreans migrated to the
United States and Hawaii. In each case, immigra-
tion was prompted by active recruitment of labor
for plantation, railroad, mining, or field work. And
in each case, anti-Asian sentiment resulted ulti-
mately in the passage of exclusion laws. Filipinos
were permitted to immigrate until l934, when they
too were barred by law from further entry.
The relatively small Asian population consisted
largely of laborers without the means or, in some
cases, the inclination to return to their homelands.
Partly because their time was consumed in struggles
for a livelihood, the Asian point of view on the im-
migrant experience is rarely presented in writings in
English or even in Asian languages. Some unknown
immigrants carved poems in Chinese into the walls
of the barracks on Angel Island, where they were
held before being allowed to enter the United States
between 1910 and 1940. Autobiographical informa-
tion about a Japanese house servant and a Chinatown
merchant was collected by Hamilton Holt, editor of
The Life Stories of Undistinguished Americans
(1906). And Carlos Bulosan, a self-taught Filipino
farm worker, was able only because of the manda-
tory rest required by his tuberculosis to write his
account of the life of the Filipino migrants in
the American West immediately prior to the
Depression. But with these exceptions, Asian immi-
grant workers vanished without leaving behind
much written account of their individual lives in
America. Although some letters and diaries written
in Asian languages have survived earthquake, fire,
and Japanese relocation, the general privation and
loneliness of Asian immigrant life, sequestered as it
was in field labor camps or urban ethnic enclaves,
must have dampened the desire to communicate. In
the face of pervasive American ignorance and an-
tipathy toward Asians, an Asian writer could hardly
know where to begin and what audience to address.
Moreover, since they were segregated from the
mainstream of American social and economic life
and prevented by law from becoming naturalized
American citizens with voting and civil rights,
many early immigrants did not learn English and
did not consider the culture it represented as some-
thing that belonged to them or to which they could
contribute.
Then, too, autobiographical writing and popular
fiction were not in the tradition of the Asian cul-
tures that produced the first immigrants. Even in
the Philippines, where the American curricula and
educational system had been instituted after the
Spanish-American War, the majority of peasants
had not the privilege of schooling, and most of the
Filipino immigrants were illiterate. In fact, labor
recruiters, in search of a docile labor force, pre-
ferred those who had little formal education. In
China and Korea, writing and literature were the
domain of the literati, who traditionally confined
themselves to poetry and the classical essay.
Autobiography as such was virtually unknown,
since for a scholar to write a book about himself
would have been deemed egotistical in the extreme.
Fiction was considered frivolous. Farmers and
peasants performed as storytellers, dramatic
dancers, and singers, but rarely expressed them-
selves through the written word. And certainly they
did not write autobiographies.
Quite understandably, then, the earliest Asian-
American writers were not representative of the
general population of Asian Americans. Foreign
students, scholars, and diplomats, who were, to-
gether with merchants, exempted from the Asian
exclusion laws and who generally received better
treatment in America than did Asian laboring peo-
ple, comprise a disproportionately large part of the
early Asian-American literary voice. Their writing
is characterized by efforts to bridge the gap be-
tween East and West and plead for tolerance by
making usually highly euphemistic observations
about the West on one hand while explaining Asia
in idealized terms on the other. Since many of these
early Asian writers in English felt that they them-
selves understood two points of view and, in some
cases, two epochs-to them the West stood for
modernity and the East for tradition-they viewed
themselves as straddling two worlds. Since they
found that elements from two vastly different cul-
tures could be combined within themselves, they
concluded that there could be points of compatibil-
ity between other people of the two cultures. They
saw themselves as ambassadors of goodwill to the
West. Most of them, however, did not believe that
social class distinctions could be bridged. Their
writing is marked by dissociation from the Asian
common people, whether in Asia or in the West,
and even their pleas for racial tolerance are made
Part III: About the PSAT/NMSQT
Directions: Questions follow the passage below. Using only the stated or implied information in the passage and in its
introduction, if any, answer the questions.
primarily on behalf of members of their own privi-
leged class. They tended to accept discrimination
against the poor and uneducated members of their
own race as reasonable, questioning instead the
logic of discrimination against the educated elite.
39. This passage is primarily concerned with
A. anti-Asian sentiments in the United States in
the late 19th and early 20th centuries.
B. the poor living conditions of early Asian
immigrant laborers.
C. illiteracy among early Asian immigrants.
D. the reasons that early Asian immigrants left
little record of their experiences.
E. the relationship between Asian laborers and
educated Asian Americans.
40. The Asian exclusion laws mentioned in the first
paragraph
A. barred the immigration of all Asians except
Filipinos.
B. prohibited Asian immigrants from voting.
C. allowed only certain Asians to immigrate to
the United States.
D. were enacted because Asian immigrants were
taking jobs from U.S. citizens.
E. were responsible for discouraging Asian-
American workers from writing about their
experiences.
41. "Privation" in line 35 most nearly means
A. lack of comforts and necessities.
B. lack of educational opportunity.
C. inhumane treatment.
D. lack of privacy.
E. sterility.
42. All the following inferences can be drawn from
the passage EXCEPT
A. many immigrant laborers were not taught
English.
B. most Americans were not interested in
reading about the immigrant laborers'
experiences.
C. Asian laborers did not mix freely with
American citizens.
D. Asian culture did not encourage the writing
of novels and short stories.
E. Asian laborers were hostile to the United
States and longed to return to their
homelands.
43. The author cites The Life Stories of
Undistinguished Americans because it
A. shows Asian laborers' low self-esteem.
B. includes information about two Asian-
American workers.
C. includes the only existing writing by early
Asian immigrants.
D. was edited by an American rather than an
Asian.
E. sympathetically portrays the plight of the
Asian immigrants.
44. According to the passage, one of the reasons so
many of the early Asian immigrant laborers were
uneducated was that
A. educated Asians disdained American culture
and traditions and weren't interested in
coming to America.
B. labor recruiters found it easy to dupe
uneducated Asians with false promises.
C. formal education was considered
unnecessary in most Asian countries.
D. labor recruiters thought uneducated workers
would be less likely to cause trouble.
E. illiterate Asians agreed to come to the United
States because they knew they would have
more opportunities for an education than in
their own countries.
45. "Enclaves" as it is used in line 37 most nearly
means
A. slums.
B. ghettos.
C. restricted areas.
D. labor camps.
E. tenements.
46. From the last paragraph of the passage, the reader
can infer that early Asian-American writers who
were educated
A. were eager to be accepted in their new
country.
B. wrote works of no literary value.
C. wrote works that were accepted readily by
the American audience.
D. portrayed their native countries more
realistically than they portrayed America.
E. wrote only autobiographies and other
nonfictional works.
PSAT/NMSQT Practice Test
PSAT/NMSQT Practice Test
GO ON TO THE NEXT PAGE
47. According to the author, educated Asian
immigrants
A. preferred the customs of America to the
traditions of their homelands.
B. urged American readers to be tolerant and
understanding of the plight of immigrants.
C. believed that in America, social class
distinctions should disappear.
D. felt that their education should exempt them
from discrimination by Americans.
E. adopted English as their written language as
a sign of their commitment to America.
48. "Highly euphemistic observations" in line 82 most
nearly means
A. untruthful comments.
B. observations in language designed to be
inoffensive.
C. seemingly profound statements that in fact
contain little meaning.
D. flowery, redundant compliments.
E. observations designed to provoke intelligent
discussions about the blending of two
cultures.
Part III: About the PSAT/NMSQT
IF YOU FINISH BEFORE TIME IS CALLED, CHECK YOUR WORK ON THIS
SECTION ONLY . DO NOT WORK ON ANY OTHER SECTION IN THE TEST. STOP
Section 4: Mathematics
Time: 25 Minutes
18 Questions
Directions: This section is composed of two types of questions. Use the 25 minutes allotted to answer both question
types. For questions 21-28, select the one correct answer of the five choices given and mark the corresponding circle on
your answer sheet. Your scratch work should be done on any available space in the section.
Notes
1. All numbers used are real numbers.
2. Calculators may be used.
3. Some problems may be accompanied by figures or diagrams. These figures are drawn as accurately as possible
EXCEPT when it is stated in a specific problem that a figure is not drawn to scale. The figures and diagrams are
meant to provide information useful in solving the problem or problems. Unless otherwise stated, all figures and
diagrams lie in a plane.
Data That Can Be Used for Reference
rectangle
A = lw
Area
triangle
circle
rectangular solid
V = lwh
Volume
right circular cylinder
Pythagorean Relationship
Special T riangles
A circle is composed of 360°
A straight angle measures 180°
The sum of the angles of a triangle is 180°
w
l
h
b
r
M
r
h
l
h
w
a2 + b2 = c 2
C B
A
c
a
b
x
x
PSAT/NMSQT Practice Test
PSAT/NMSQT Practice Test
GO ON TO THE NEXT PAGE
21. A shirt that regularly sells for $40 is on sale for
$28. What is the percent decrease?
22. If x + y < 50 and xy > 50, then which of the
following is not a possible value of x?
Note: Figure not drawn to scale.
23. In the figure above line1 is parallel to line2. What is
the value of x + y?
24. If m = (n + 5)4, then -(3n + 15)4 equals which of
the following?
A. -81m
B. -27m
C. -9m
x
y
z
Part III: About the PSAT/NMSQT
25. Which of the following is equal to
26. The perimeter of a rectangle is 42, and its length is
8 more than its width. What is the length of the
rectangle?
27. What is the length of PQ if P has coordinates
(-8, 1) and Q has coordinates (-4, -5)?
28. A fruit drink made from orange juice and water is
diluted with more water so that the final solution is
water. If the original solution was 90% orange
juice and two liters of water were added, how
many liters are in the final solution of the fruit
drink?
A. 6
B. 8
PSAT/NMSQT Practice Test
PSAT/NMSQT Practice Test
GO ON TO THE NEXT PAGE
Directions for Student-Produced Response Questions (Grid-ins): Questions 29-38 require you to solve the
problem and enter your answer by carefully marking the circles on the special grid. Examples of the appropriate way
to mark the grid follow.
Answer: 3.7 Answer: 2
Answer: 1 2
Do not grid in mixed numbers in the form of mixed numbers. Always change mixed numbers to improper fractions or
decimals.
Change to 1.5 or Change to 2
.. .
.. .
.. .
Fraction bar
.. .
Decimal point
Part III: About the PSAT/NMSQT
Answer: 123
Space permitting, answers can start in any column. Each grid-in answer that follows is correct.
Note: Circles must be filled in correctly to receive credit. Mark only one circle in each column. No credit will be given
if more than one circle in a column is marked. Example:
Answer: 258 (no credit)
.. .
.. .
.. .
PSAT/NMSQT Practice Test
PSAT/NMSQT Practice Test
GO ON TO THE NEXT PAGE
Answer: 9
Accuracy of decimals: Always enter the most accurate decimal value that the grid will accommodate. For example: An
answer such as .8888 . . . can be gridded as .888 or .889. Gridding this value as .8, .88, or .89 is considered inaccurate
and therefore not acceptable. The acceptable grid-ins of 9
are:
Be sure to write your answers in the boxes at the top of the circles before doing your gridding. Although writing out the
answers above the columns is not required, it is very important to ensure accuracy. Even though some problems may
have more than one correct answer, grid only one answer. Grid-in questions contain no negative answers.
.. .
.. .
.. .
Part III: About the PSAT/NMSQT
29. In the figure above, x =
The product of the digits is 8.
The sum of the digits is 7.
30. What is the smallest 3-digit number that has the
31. If mmn
10+ = , then mn =
32. Set A consists of all multiples of 4 between 50 and
65. Set B consists of all multiples of 3 between 50
and 65. What is one possible number that is in Set
A but NOT in Set B?
33. In a certain species of fish, 0.3 percent of a school
are born with physical defects. If a school of fish
contains 21 individuals with such defects, how
many fish are in the school?
34. If (2z + 5)(3z + 4) = az2 + bz + c for all values of z,
what is the value of b?
35. In the figure above, what is the value of x?
PSAT/NMSQT Practice Test
PSAT/NMSQT Practice Test
GO ON TO THE NEXT PAGE
36. What is the perimeter of the 12-sided figure
above?
37. If 5x + 9y = 28 and x and y are positive integers,
what is the value of x?
38. If the ratio of the side of cube X to the side of cube
Z is 3
, then what is the ratio of the volume of cube
X to the volume of cube Z?
Part III: About the PSAT/NMSQT
IF YOU FINISH BEFORE TIME IS CALLED, CHECK YOUR WORK ON THIS
SECTION ONLY . DO NOT WORK ON ANY OTHER SECTION IN THE TEST. STOP
1. The beginnings of van Dyke's short stories are
as good as, if not better, his endings.
A. as good as, if not better
B. good as, if not better
C. as good as, if not better than
D. as good and better than
E. as good and better as
2. To germinate properly, the seeds of the sweet pea
must be planted in either spring or fall.
A. in either spring or fall.
B. in either the spring or in the fall.
C. either in the spring or the fall.
D. either the spring or in the fall.
E. either in spring or the fall.
3. Bryant Park and Washington Square, Manhattan's
finest squares, lined with buildings whose
architects were aware that they were creating walls
to enclose space.
A. lined with buildings whose architects
B. are lined by buildings whose architects
C. are lined by architects with buildings that
D. with buildings by architects who
E. surrounded by buildings whose architects
4. It is feared by many real estate agents that the
Internet will soon replace them.
A. It is feared by many real estate agents
B. It is the fear of many real estate agents
C. By many real estate agents, it is feared
D. Many real estate agents have the fear
E. Many real estate agents fear
PSAT/NMSQT Practice Test
PSAT/NMSQT Practice Test
GO ON TO THE NEXT PAGE
Section 5: Writing Skills
Time: 30 Minutes
39 Questions
In this section, choose the best answer for each question and blacken the corresponding space on the answer sheet.
Directions: The following questions test correctness and effective expression. In selecting the answer, pay attention to
grammar, diction, sentence structure, and punctuation. In the following questions, part or all of each sentence is under-
lined. The A answer repeats the underline of the original sentence, while the next four offer alternatives. Choose the
answer that best expresses the meaning of the original sentence, and at the same time is grammatically correct and
stylistically superior. The correct choice should be clear, unambiguous, and concise.
EXAMPLE:
In her performance, Eartha Kitt sang songs in English, in French, and she sang in Arabic.
A. in English, in French, and she sang in Arabic.
B. in English and French, and she also sang in Arabic.
C. in English and French, singing also in Arabic.
D. in English, French, and Arabic.
E. in English, in French, and Arabic.
The correct answer is D.
5. The anthropologist Scoditti set out to record the
islanders' songs, to understand their ritual dances,
and he wanted to explain the symbolism of their
carvings.
A. and he wanted to explain the symbolism
B. also wanting to explain the symbolism
C. explaining the symbolism
D. and to explain the symbolism
E. and explaining the symbolism
6. If the repairs of the rockets are completed by June,
the launch taking place in July.
A. the launch taking place in July.
B. the launch having taken place in July.
C. the launch will take place in July.
D. the launch has taken place in July.
E. the launch will have taken place in July.
7. A notorious speakeasy during Prohibition, Ernest
Hemingway made this saloon his favorite haunt,
and it is still a popular tourist attraction.
A. Ernest Hemingway made this saloon his
favorite haunt
B. Ernest Hemingway's favorite was to haunt
this saloon
C. this saloon was Ernest Hemingway's favorite
haunt
D. the favorite haunt of Ernest Hemingway was
this saloon
E. this saloon became the favorite haunt of
Ernest Hemingway
8. The Secretary of State's visit to China, it is hoped,
will lay the groundwork for the Premier's visit to
Washington, and this is when the disarmament
treaty will be signed.
A. and this is when
B. at which time
C. which is when
D. and that is when
E. and this the time when
9. If one digs beneath the snow in the garden, you
may find the scarlet flowers of the hardy cyclamen.
A. you may find
B. you may come upon
C. you come across
D. one may find
E. one finds
10 . Like New York City, the Internet has long traffic
delays, easy access to pornography, and there are
far too many self-centered babblers.
A. there are far too many self-centered babblers.
B. it also has far too many self-centered
babblers.
C. and far too many self-centered babblers.
D. and there are too many self-centered babblers
by far.
E. and it has far too many self-centered
babblers.
11. The knot garden, a blend of geometry and plants,
creates patterns to please the eye.
A. creates patterns to please the eye.
B. creates patterns which pleases the eyes.
C. create eye-pleasing patterns.
D. create a pattern that pleases the eye.
E. please the eye by creating a pattern.
12 . John Adams and Thomas Jefferson were often
bitter political adversaries, and they maintained a
personal relationship that outlasted their rivalry.
A. and they maintained a personal relationship
B. but they maintained a personal relationship
C. but a personal relationship was maintained
by them
D. so a personal relationship was maintained
E. thus maintaining a personal relationship
13 . Audubon recorded in watercolors not only the
birds of America but also the plants and the
animals.
A. Audubon recorded in watercolors not only
B. Audubon's watercolors not only recorded
C. Audubon's watercolors recording not only
D. Audubon recorded not only in watercolors
E. Audubon not only recorded in watercolors
14 . Many large corporations support the literacy
project, they donate materials developed by
literacy experts to reading centers throughout
the country.
A. they donate
B. they make donations of
C. and they donate
D. and donating
E. to donate
Part III: About the PSAT/NMSQT
15 . In the legend, the evil Ravana abducts the virtuous
Sita, carries her off to Ceylon, and he is defeated
there by Rama in a final battle.
A. he is defeated there by Rama in a final battle.
B. there, in a final battle, he is defeated by Rama.
C. falls to Rama there in a final battle.
D. is defeated there, in a final battle, by Rama.
E. it is there that he is defeated by Rama in a
final battle.
16 . Yielding to the public demand for a happy ending,
the end of the film will be edited to reunite the
lovers.
A. the end of the film will be edited to reunite
the lovers.
B. the lovers will be reunited at the end of the
film.
C. the end of the film will reunite the lovers
after being edited.
D. after editing the film will reunite the lovers.
E. the director will edit the end of the film to
reunite the lovers.
17. Some kind of expansion of the permanent five-
member Security Council is inevitable, it may
come in the very near future.
A. is inevitable, it may come
B. is inevitable, and it may come
C. is inevitable it may come
D. is inevitable, coming
E. is inevitable, maybe it will come
18 . Late night talk-radio programs that give the
Chinese listener a chance to speak openly have
surprised and delighted a huge audience.
A. have surprised and delighted a huge
audience.
B. have been a surprise and a delight to a huge
audience.
C. surprised a huge audience, also delighting it.
D. surprised as well as delighting a huge
audience.
E. were surprising and a delight to a huge
audience.
19 . The notion that human beings will usually act to
benefit themselves is an idea that for even the most
idealistic is with easy comprehension.
A. is with easy comprehension.
B. is to comprehend easily.
C. is easy to comprehend.
D. is easy for comprehending.
E. is with ease in comprehending.
20. The increases in tourism and resort building
reflecting the health of the Chilean economy,
which has expanded by 12% this year.
A. reflecting the health of the Chilean economy,
B. reflect the health of the Chilean economy,
C. reflecting signs of the health of the Chilean
economy,
D. clear indications of the health of the Chilean
economy,
E. and the increasing health of the Chilean,
PSAT/NMSQT Practice Test
PSAT/NMSQT Practice Test
GO ON TO THE NEXT PAGE
Part III: About the PSAT/NMSQT
AB C
D
E
AB C
D
E
21. The report written by experts on Asia
recommend a large loan from the World Bank
to repair the roads battered by floods. No error.
22. Everywhere you look in New York City, onesees
the white-brick apartment buildings that sprang up
after the war like mushrooms.No error.
23. In virtual every year, the young men set sail for
other islands to participate in a series of gift
exchanges. No error.
24. Last year, Americans spent millions on
tobacco products, and despite the warnings
against smoking, they spend even more this year
and next. No error.
25. Neither Henry James nor James Whistler, both
great lovers of France, were able to earn a living
in Paris, and moved to London. No error.
26. Walking on coral from their earliest years, the
Kitawans develop soles as tough as leather and
they find the tender feet of Westerners very odd.
No error.
27. Edwards is a lazy journalist who will not do
hardly any work until a deadline approaches.
No error.
28. The city punishes the self-employed in not being
a corporation with the unincorporated business
tax. No error.
Directions: The following sentences may contain one error of grammar, usage, diction, or idiom. No sentence will
contain more than one error, and some have no error. If there is an error, it will be underlined and have a letter beneath
it. Sections of the sentence that are not underlined cannot be changed. In selecting your answer, observe the require-
ments of standard written English. If there is an error, choose the one underlined part that must be changed to correct
the sentence. If there is no error, choose E.
EXAMPLE:
The violinist and her will audition for the conductor as soon as they have completed their studies. No error.
The correct answer is A.
A BC D E
A
BC
DE
A
B
CD E
AB
CD
E
A B
CD
E
A
BC
DE
A
BC
D
E
PSAT/NMSQT Practice Test
PSAT/NMSQT Practice Test
GO ON TO THE NEXT PAGE
29. Like London's subway system, that of Boston is
easy to learn and expensive to use. No error.
30. The older houses of the Florida Keys mirrors a
multicultural legacy of Bahamian, New England,
African, and Creole influences. No error.
31. Investment strategists in the New York offices of
Morgan Stanley continue to believe that stocks
are the best possible investment. No error.
32. Like Shakespeare, Whitman's writings continue
to be relevant to our culture. No error.
33. The large gilt mirror above the fireplace giving
the room the atmosphere of a Viennese apartment
of the nineteenth century. No error.
34. New York City is more populousthan any one of
30 states and has a budget larger than that of 45.
No error.
AB
CD E
C
AB
D E
A
BC
DE
AB
CD E
AB
C
D E
AB
CD
E
Questions 35-39 are based on the following passage.
(1) I was born in California and my mother and father
were born in Thailand. (2) Thailand used to be called
Siam. (3) A few years ago they went to Thailand to visit
my grandparents at the time when a new king was being
crowned.
(4) My grandparents lived in a small town not far from
the capital city, which is called Bangkok. (5) The corona-
tion ceremony of a Thai king is very ancient. (6) It has a
long history and has been passed down from very olden
times. (7) On coronation day, a Brahmin poured holy wa-
ter on the king's hands. (8) Then, after the ceremony the
king could issue royal commands with the help of the
Hindu gods Siva, Vishnu, and Brahma. (9) Later, Buddhist
monks also participate in the coronation. (10) In modern
times, the Representatives and Senators will also offer
holy water to the king. (11) Thus, combining the religious
and the political.
(12) Unlike the musical The King and I,Thailand today
is a democracy, but it still has a king. (13) The coronation
of the king combined the new democratic people plus reli-
gion and ancient ceremony. (14) Thus, Thailand honors the
past and marches into the future.
35. Which of the following is the best version of
sentences 1 and 2 (reproduced below)?
I was born in California and my mother and
father were born in Thailand. Thailand used
to be called Siam.
A. Leave it as it is.
B. I was born in California, and my mother and
father were born in Thailand, which used to
be called Siam.
C. I was born in California, but my parents were
born in Thailand, which used to be called
Siam.
D. Born in California, my parents are from
Siam, which is now called Thailand.
E. I was born in California. My parents were
born in Thailand. Thailand was formerly
called Siam.
36. Which of the following is the best way to revise
and combine sentences 5 and 6 (reproduced
below)?
The coronation ceremony of a Thai king is
very ancient. It has a long history and has
been passed down from very olden times.
A. The coronation ceremony of a Thai king has
a long ancient history and has been passed
down from very old times.
B. The long ancient history of the coronation
ceremony of a Thai king has been passed
down from olden times.
C. A Thai king's coronation ceremony, passed
down from ancient times.
D. The coronation ceremony of a Thai king has
been passed down from ancient times.
E. Passed down from olden times, the ancient
coronation ceremony of a Thai king has a
long history.
37. Which of the following is the most effective
version of the underlined portions of sentences
10 and 11 (reproduced below)?
In modern times, the Representatives and
Senators will also offer holy water to the
king. Thus combining the religious and the
political.
A. Leave it as it is.
B. also offer holy water to the king. Thus
combining the religious and the political.
C. also will offer holy water to the king. Thus,
they combine religion and politics.
D. also offer holy water to the king, adding a
political element to the religious.
E. combined religion and politics when offering
holy water to the king.
Part III: About the PSAT/NMSQT
Directions: The following passage is an early draft of an essay. Some parts need to be revised.
Read the selection carefully and answer the questions that follow. There will be questions about sentence structure, dic-
tion, and usage in individual sentences or parts of sentences. Other questions will deal with the whole essay or para-
graphs and ask you to decide about organization, development, and appropriate language. Choose the answer that
follows the requirements of standard written English and most effectively expresses the intended meanings.
38. Which of the following sentences in the second
paragraph can best be omitted or moved to a
different paragraph in the essay?
A. the fourth
B. the seventh
C. the eighth
D. the ninth
E. the tenth
39. In the context of the third paragraph, which of the
following is the best version of the underlined
portion of sentence 12 (reproduced below)?
Unlike the musical The King and I, Thailand
today is a democracy but it still has a king.
A. Leave it as it is.
B. Unlike the musical The King and I, Thailand
today is democratic
C. Unlike the musical The King and I, modern
Thailand is democratic
D. Unlike the country in the musical The King
and I, Thailand today is democratic
E. Thailand today, unlike the musical The King
and I, is a democracy
PSAT/NMSQT Practice Test
PSAT/NMSQT Practice Test
IF YOU FINISH BEFORE TIME IS CALLED, CHECK YOUR WORK ON THIS
SECTION ONLY . DO NOT WORK ON ANY OTHER SECTION IN THE TEST. STOP
Scoring PSAT/NMSQT Practice Test
Answer Key
Section 1: Critical Reading
Part III: About the PSAT/NMSQT
1. C
2. B
3. B
4. A
5. E
6. D
7. C
8. A
9. B
Section 2: Mathematics
1. C
2. D
3. A
4. B
5. D
6. A
7. D
8. B
9. B
Section 3: Critical Reading
Section 4: Mathematics
PSAT/NMSQT Practice Test
PSAT/NMSQT Practice TestSection 5: Writing Skills
1. C
2. A
3. B
4. E
5. D
6. C
7. C
8. B
9. D
Analyzing Your Test Results
The charts on the following pages should be used to carefully analyze your results and spot your strengths and weak-
nesses. The complete process of analyzing each subject area and each individual problem should be completed for the
practice test. These results should then be reexamined for trends in types of errors (repeated errors) or poor results in
specific subject areas. This reexamination and analysis is of tremendous importance to you in ensuring maximum test-
preparation benefit.
Critical Reading Analysis Sheet
Section 1 Possible Completed Right Wrong
Sentence Completion 6
Short Reading Passages 4
Long Reading Passages 1 3
Subtotal 23
Section 3 Possible Completed Right Wrong
Sentence Completion 7
Short Reading Passages 8
Long Reading Passages 1 0
Subtotal 25
Overall Critical Reading Totals 48
Mathematics Analysis Sheet
Section 2 Possible Completed Right Wrong
Multiple Choice 20
Subtotal 20
Section 4 Possible Completed Right Wrong
Multiple Choice 8
Grid-Ins 1 0
Subtotal 18
Overall Math Totals 38
Writing Skills Analysis Sheet
Section 5 Possible Completed Right Wrong
Improving Sentences 20
Identifying Sentence Errors 1 4
Improving Paragraphs 5
Overall Writing Skills Totals 39
Analysis/Tally Sheet for Problems Missed
One of the most important parts of test preparation is analyzing why you missed a problem so that you can reduce the
number of mistakes. Now that you have taken the practice test and checked your answers, carefully tally your mistakes
by marking them in the proper column.
Reason for Mistakes
Total Simple Misread Lack of Lack of
Missed Mistake Problem Knowledge Time
Section 1: Critical Reading
Section 3: Critical Reading
Subtotal
Section 2: Mathematics
Section 4: Mathematics
Subtotal
Section 5: Writing
Total Reading, Math, and Writing
Reviewing the preceding data should help you determine why you are missing certain problems. Now that you've pin-
pointed the types of errors, focus on eliminating them.
Part III: About the PSAT/NMSQT
Complete Answers and Explanations for PSAT/NMSQT
Practice Test
Section 1: Critical Reading
Sentence Completion
1. C. The missing word should describe an object like a bed or chair. Only "inanimate" (without life) makes sense
in this context.
2. B. The word needed here must accord with the words "inconsiderate" and "unhealthy" and refer to a man or
woman. "Mordant," which means "caustic," does not quite fit this context, so the best choice is "shameful."
3. B. Any of the nouns except "placebos" might fit here, though D and E are less good than A or B. Neither
"soporific" nor "somnolent" can work here, since a doctor would have some concern about the sleep-inducing
properties. "Tonic" (invigorating) is clearly a bad choice, but "addictive" and "narcotics" make good sense of the
sentence.
4. A. Since the second half of the sentence refers to the eleven different languages, the right answer must be
"linguistic."
5. E. Since the rains have caused so many floods, the first adjective must be either C "massive" or E "unprecedented."
The second word must mean something like "increased," but with only C and E to choose from, the answer must be
"augmented."
6. D. The first adjective should mean something like "shocking"; of the five choices, either B "unusual" or D
"audacious" is a possibility. The verb must mean something like "put together." Words like "confine" A and
"combine" C would work, but these letters have already been eliminated. The best choice is "juxtapose" D.
Short Reading Passages
7. C. See lines 3-4. Although illiteracy may have been more widespread in the 18th and 19th centuries, nothing
in the passage indicates this or suggests that illiteracy, A, or lack of scientific knowledge, E, benefited the
manufacturers of patent medicines. Also, there is no evidence of a "weak" Congress, B, only one that hadn't yet
addressed the problem. Finally, the "snake-oil" salesmen may have been fast-talking, but nothing suggests they
were "highly trained," D. Be careful not to choose answers merely because they are plausible. Instead, rely on
information provided or implied by the text.
8. A. The sentence states that new regulations occur only when the public is outraged. This suggests that future
problems with patent medicines could lead to public pressure, which in turn could lead to more regulation.
B and C may be accurate but are not indicated by the last sentence, and D and E are simply untrue.
9. B. "Store" and "mill" would be familiar terms because of their association with the processing of grain.
Computer and electronic terminology didn't yet exist. Note that the author of the passage also uses a metaphor
suitable for Babbage's time to describe information leakage: " . . . like faulty sacks of flour" (line 12). A may be
true but is not related to the choice of the terms. C and D are irrelevant, and E supposes that Babbage was
concerned about appealing to the working class, which is not supported anywhere in the paragraph.
10 . A. See lines 14-15. His impatience, D, may have been a factor in his inability to get funding, but only one factor.
There is no suggestion that a lack of education stopped Babbage, C, and although the design called for a machine
as big as a train, nothing implies that this kept Babbage from building it, E. Nowhere in the paragraph are other
mathematicians mentioned.
PSAT/NMSQT Practice Test
PSAT/NMSQT Practice Test
Long Reading Passages
11. D. The passage doesn't suggest a moratorium is needed, A; in fact, it calls for further research. Nor does it
suggest fears are "groundless," B; see lines 44-45. C is a minor point in the passage, and although the passage
mentions research, it does not describe it, E.
12 . A. Uncontrolled gene transfer is the possibility that most concerns critics. Nothing indicates that B will occur,
and C, D, and E are not specifically mentioned in the passage.
13 . B. This is the best definition considering the context. The word can also mean C, but that definition is appropriate to
conscious beings, not bacterial genes. D may seem to fit context, but it-like A and E-is not a correct definition of
the word.
14 . B. In lines 40-43, the passage specifically mentions the fragility of the altered bacteria. C and E are not mentioned.
D is correct in only one instance; it is cited as an example. While the EPA is mentioned in the passage, nothing
suggests it is reluctant, A.
15 . A. See lines 4-8. C is incorrect; altered bacteria may help clean up oil spills but they don't prevent them. E might
be possible but is not mentioned as a benefit. The meaning of B is unclear, and D is simply incorrect.
16 . B. Nowhere in the passage is it implied that the benefits are not worth the risks. In fact, the author clearly
indicates that with further research, altered bacteria can be safely used. All of the other points are either implied
or stated in the passage.
17. A. This is the best definition considering the context. Although B is also a correct definition, it clearly doesn't fit
here. E is also a correct definition of the word but is not as appropriate as A for cloth (crinoline). C and D are
simply incorrect definitions.
18 . C. See lines 12-15. Although B might be true, it is not implied in the passage. Neither is A; in fact, the passage
suggests that men felt women were unsuited for intellectual pursuits. D and E are simply inaccurate.
19 . C. Note the root word "merit." In the context of the passage, "government" (A and D) is not appropriate;
"system" is a better choice. Although a meritocracy excludes sex or race discrimination, it does discriminate on
the basis of ability. Therefore, B is incorrect. E is irrelevant.
20. D. See lines 51-57. Although a contrast is drawn with business, it is not related to the rewards of a career in
either field, C. B is not specifically supported in the passage, while E is not addressed. A is incorrect; science may
be a good field for women, but the passage indicates that it still does not offer them abundant opportunities.
21. C. The attitudes described in Passage 1 are behind the convictions and inherited ideas that, according to the
passage, influence 20th century scientists (lines 48-57). Passage 2 suggests that although B should be true, it is
not as of yet (lines 82-89). A is not accurate, according to Passage 2, and D is not addressed in the passage. The
attitudes described in Passage 2 are not significantly different from those described in Passage 1, E.
22. E. The purposes of the passages are very different: Passage 1 is a historical account, while Passage 2 is arguing a
point. Women's feelings aren't described in Passage 1 and are barely touched upon in Passage 2, A. The women
referred to in Passage 1, while not encouraged by men to engage in intellectual pursuits, are not themselves
described as anti-intellectual, B. At first C may sound like a good answer, but Passage 2, for example, does
include facts in the form of statistics. The future is not discussed in Passage 1, D.
23. B. Passage 1 doesn't address the attitudes of scientists apart from the attitudes of men in general, whereas
Passage 2 specifically targets scientists. Both passages are concerned with social stereotypes A, C, and E are not
covered in either passage, and D is touched on in Passage 1 but not in Passage 2.
Part III: About the PSAT/NMSQT
Section 2: Mathematics
Multiple Choice
1. C. In 864,925, the number in the thousands place is 4. Because the number immediately to the right of 4 is 5 or
larger (9), round the thousands digit up to a 5, which yields 865,000.
4. B. Because the product of an odd number of negative integers is a negative integer, the maximum number of the
six integers that could be negative is five.
5. D. Let x = first integer
x + 1 = second integer
x + 2 = third integer
Since the sum of the three integers is 141,
xx x
x
x
x
x
x
++++ =
+-= -
The largest integer is x + 2 = 48.
6. A. If z
3 25= , then multiplying both sides of the equation by 3 yields
z
z
7. D. For any numbers m and n, m4 ≥ 0 and n4 ≥ 0.
Since m4 + n4 = 0, then both m = 0 and n= 0. Therefore 9m - 5n = (9)(0) - 5(0) = 0.
8. B. Since Distance = Rate × Time,
Time Rate
Distance=
The distance that Marcos travels is d miles at a rate of 55 miles per hour. Hence the time it takes is d
55 hours.
9. B. Substituting a = 4b - 11 for a in the equation a + 5 = 3b, yields
4b - 6 = 3b
b - 6 = 0
b - 6 + 6 = 0 + 6
b = 6
PSAT/NMSQT Practice Test
PSAT/NMSQT Practice Test
10 . D. The volume of a cube with side length x is x3. If x3 = 64, then x = 4.
The area of any face of the cube is x2 = 42 = 16.
11. C. Since the sum of the angles in any triangle must equal 180°,
mnmn
m
m
m
++ - =
Note: The given value of n = 50 is not needed to solve for m.
12 . B. Since the sum of two odd integers is an even integer, and 3x + 11 is even, then 3x must be odd. Since the
product of two odd integers is an odd integer, then x must be an odd integer. Hence x + 1 must be an even integer.
13 . B. The volume of a rectangular box is lwh. With the given dimensions and volume V = lwh
z z y
y
y
y
^ c _h m i
14 . E. There are many different values for x and y such that xy = 21. Therefore, there are many different values for
the ratio of x to y, and thus the ratio cannot be determined from the information given.
15 . A. The radius of circle P will also be 40% of the radius of circle Q. Because the area of any circle is πr2, the
radius will be used to compare the areas of the two circles. Since
the area of circle P will be 16% of the area of circle Q.
16 . C. Since
,xx x y x
x y
x y
x y
and
== =
^ dh n
17. E. For the expression 3x - 4 to be greater than 4 and less than 250,
Add 4,
Divide by 3,
x
x
Since x is an integer, x = 3, 4, 5 . . . 82, 83, 84. Hence there are 82 integer values of x.
Part III: About the PSAT/NMSQT
18 . C. In the figure, OX = 2 and OY = 3, and the area of /H17005XOY is OX OY2
=^^hh .
For the area of /H17005WYZ to be the same,
YZ WZ WZ
WZ
WZ
WZ
^^ ^ ^
hh hh
h
h
Hence the coordinates of W are (4, 6).
19 . D. In the set of numbers from 1 to 50 inclusive, there are 16 numbers divisible by 3: 3, 6, 9, . . . , 48. Therefore,
the probability that a ticket selected will have a number divisible by 3 is 50
Since the area of the smaller circle is 100π and the area of any circle is πr2, then
r
r
r
So r = 10 is the radius of the smaller circle.
Since AD = AE, the diameter of the smaller circle is the same as the radius of the larger circle, so the larger
circle's diameter is 20.
Hence the area of the larger circle
B ECAD
y
x
Z(4,0)O
W
PSAT/NMSQT Practice Test
PSAT/NMSQT Practice Test
Section 3: Critical Reading
Sentence Completions
24. E. The missing adverb must describe the giving of a man described as "kind and modest." Of the five choices,
only "unobtrusively" (that is, "quietly") fits well.
25. D. Since the farmers dislike the Easterners, the missing verb should denote something like "refusal." The only
possibility is "discouraged" D.
26. C. The first adjective could be "obscure" A, "remote" C, or "uninhabited" D, but the noun should denote a large
or growing number of people who are threatened. The two possibilities are B and C, but B has been eliminated
already.
27. A. The right answer must follow logically from the verb "fought" and also accord with the adjective "small."
The best choice is "skirmishes," which is idiomatic and relevant.
28. D. The first missing noun cannot be A, but the four other choices are possible. The best choice for the second
noun is "memento" (a keepsake, reminder, or souvenir). B is a remote possibility, but a "daguerreotype" is an
early nineteenth-century photograph, surely long predating an espionage trial.
29. E. Choices B and D make little sense. An "epithet" is a characterizing word or phrase, such as rosy-fingered
(Dawn) or thunder-bearing (Jove). An epigram is a terse and witty saying. The best choice here is "epitaph," the
inscription about the dead on a tomb or monument.
30. B. Only the more generalized "technological" could apply to all of the fields listed in this series. The words
"pictorial" and "cinematic" fit several but not all of the terms, such as "sound reproduction."
Short Reading Passages
31. C. See lines 4-9. The point of the passage is to show that although an idea has been discredited, it can live on in
certain words. The tone of the passage isn't "mocking," B, and the Renaissance is mentioned only in passing, A.
The passage doesn't "celebrate" the Middle Ages, D; the author simply points out that the 19th century view has
been discredited. E is the second best answer but is imprecise because the use of terms such as "medieval" and
"Dark Ages" is not due to carelessness but rather to the persistence of an old idea.
32. A. From context, it is clear that the term is negative ("cumbersome, antiquated regulations," "barbarous practices,"
"primitive stage of development"). None of the other answers makes sense.
33. A. In the context of the paragraph, "perverse" suggests contrariness, a conscious decision to act against good
sense. Although the word can mean an unwillingness to do what is right or good (B or C), these definitions are
too strong here. Both D and E are incorrect definitions of "perverse."
34. E. Although no redesign has been successfully implemented for 60 years, the passage doesn't suggest that it
could never happen. Words like "never" and "always" frequently signal an incorrect answer. There is evidence in
the paragraph to support all of the other choices.
35. A. The paragraph deals primarily with the reality of the fuel cell, and the Verne quotation is a clever way to
introduce the idea behind it. See lines 6-11. Both B and D focus on science fiction, which is not the subject of
the passage. The Verne quotation doesn't "explain" anything, C, nor does it put environmental concerns "in
perspective," E.
36. D. The writer says that "engineers are working on a variety of other applications," indicating that the technology
will advance. He/She is not "advocating" or "opposing" anything (A or B). It is also not accurate to say that the
passage is "primarily" concerned with auto emissions, E; it is "primarily" concerned with the fuel cell. C is not
addressed at all in the passage.
37. D. This example in lines 5-7 doesn't pertain to the reasons that the General Enclosure Act was adopted. (Notice
the word EXCEPT in the question.) All of the other choices are functions of this particular example.
Part III: About the PSAT/NMSQT
38. C. The quotation marks are an indication that the word is used ironically or informally, A, and the ironic use
makes more sense. After the Enclosure Act, these peasants were not free but rather paupers forced to work in
factories for little money. They were actually freer when they could farm the land for themselves; and therefore B
is not accurate. The Enclosure Act had nothing to do with "freeing" peasants, E.
Long Reading Passages
39. D. The passage touches on A, B, C, and E, but its main emphasis is on the explanation of why so little writing
was produced by the early Asian immigrants.
40. C. See lines 71-77. A is incorrect because most Filipinos were also barred by these laws in 1934. D is incorrect;
the passage doesn't imply that this was the reason for passage of the laws. B and E are irrelevant, since the
exclusion laws barred immigration.
41. A. The concept of lack, or absence, is central to the word. Therefore, C is incorrect. B is too limited. D, while it
may sound correct, is not; "privacy" is not part of the definition of "privation." Also, in context, "lack of privacy"
doesn't make sense. E is an incorrect definition and also doesn't fit the context.
42. E. Note (lines 11-13) that some immigrants had no desire to return to their homelands. A (lines 44-45), B (lines
36-40), C (lines 35-36), and D (lines 60-64) are inferences that can be drawn from the passage.
43. B. The author cites the book as one of the few sources of autobiographical information about Asian immigrants.
D is true but not the reason the author cites the book. C is incorrect because this isn't the only existing writing.
The passage doesn't indicate whether the Asian workers are presented sympathetically or unsympathetically, E.
A is also incorrect; the title of the book is not related to Asian self-esteem.
44. D. See lines 57-59. The docility of the work force, not its gullibility, is cited; therefore B is not correct. A is
clearly untrue; see the final paragraph of the passage. Nothing indicates whether either C or E is a true statement.
45. B. This is the best choice in this context. One meaning of "ghetto" is a section of a city where many members of
a minority live-an "urban ethnic enclave." These enclaves are not necessarily slums, A, nor do they necessarily
consist of tenements, E. Neither C nor D fits the context here.
46. A. This inference can be drawn from lines 95-101. The passage does not imply that their works were of no
value, B, nor that they were accepted by an American audience, C. D is incorrect because the passage states that
these writers described Asia in idealized-not realistic-terms. The inference in E is contradicted by the third
paragraph of the passage.
47. D. See lines 96-101. The passage doesn't state that they "preferred" America, A, but rather that they felt able to
combine the two cultures. C is contradicted in lines 95-96. B might seem a good choice, but see lines 101-103.
Nothing in the passage suggests E.
48. B. At first glance, A may seem a good choice, but "euphemistic" does not mean untrue; it means disguising
unpleasant truths by using inoffensive or "polite" terms (for example, "passed away" instead of "died"). C, D,
and E are not supported by context nor are they correct definitions of the word.
Section 4: Mathematics
21. C. The amount of decrease is 40 - 28 = $12.
The percent of decrease = original price
amount of decrease
PSAT/NMSQT Practice Test
PSAT/NMSQT Practice Test
22. E. Since 52 would have to be added to a negative number to be less than 50, and since 52 times a negative
number is less than 50, then 52 could not be a value for x.
23. E. If l1 and l2 are parallel, then z = 20°. If z = 20°, angle x equals 160°, because they form a straight line. Since x
24. A. Since (3n + 15) can be factored and written as [3(n + 5)], then -(3n + 15)4 can be written as -[3(n + 5)]4.
Notice that the negative sign is outside the brackets, so it is not affected. -[3(n + 5)]4 = -[34(n + 5)4], which can
be simplified to -[81(n + 5)4], since 34 = 3 × 3 × 3 × 3 = 81. Now replace (n + 5)4 with m, and you get -81m.
26. D. Let x = width and x + 8 = length.
Since the perimeter of the rectangle is 42,
2x + 2(x + 8) = 42
x = 4
Therefore, the length of the rectangle is 14 2
27. A. The distance between two points (x1, y1) and (x2, y2) is:
dx x y y
d
=- + -
=- + ++
h i
hh
28. D. You could set up an equation.
Original solution + amount of pure water = new solution
Let x be the unknown amount of original solution. Solutions will be expressed in terms of concentration of water.
Now solve for x.
y
Part III: About the PSAT/NMSQT
Subtract .50 from each side.
Next subtract .10x from each side.
Finally divide each side by .15.
x is the number of liters in the original solution. Since the final solution is two additional liters of water, the final
solution will be 12 liters.
Grid-Ins
29. Answer: 85
Since the three angles form a straight line
Since the sum of the digits is 7, no digit can be greater than 7. Since the product of the digits is 8, the choices of
the digits are 1,2,4 or 2,2,2. The smallest 3-digit number would be 124.
31. Answer: 9
Since
. ...
mmn
mm mn
mn
mn
mn
mn
+- = -
Note that answers 9
and .111 are correct, but .1 and .11 are not correct in this situation.
PSAT/NMSQT Practice Test
PSAT/NMSQT Practice Test
The multiples of 4 between 50 and 65 are
The multiples of 3 between 50 and 65 are
The numbers in Set A but not in Set B are 52, 56, and 64. Note that although more than one answer is possible,
you need to grid in only one of them for full credit.
Let x = number of fish in the school
0.3 percent of x is 21
x
There are 7,000 fish in the school.
34. Answer: 23
Multiplying (2 z + 5)(3z + 4) = 6z2 + 8z + 15z + 20
Since (2 z + 5)(3z + 4) = az2 + bz + c for all values of z,
and
35. Answer: 18
Since the sum of the angles in any triangle must equal 180°,
xx
x
x
x
x
x
++ =
+-= -
Part III: About the PSAT/NMSQT
The perimeter of this 12-sided figure is the same as the perimeter of a square with side length 30 plus four
additional segments of length 8.
The perimeter is 152 units.
37. Answer: 2
Since x and y are positive integers and 5x + 9y = 28, the only possible values for y are 1, 2, and 3. If y were
greater than 3, x would have to be a negative integer.
Substituting 1, 2, or 3 for y will show that y = 2 is the only value that will yield an integer value for x.
Hence,
x
x
x
x
x
x
+-=-
Let S = Length of a side of cube X
3S = Length of a side of cube Z
The volume of cube X = S3 and the volume of cube Z = (3S)3 = 27S3
The ratio of their volumes is S
S
PSAT/NMSQT Practice Test
PSAT/NMSQT Practice Test
Section 5: Writing Skills
Improving Sentences
1. C. There are two phrases here that must be complete, "as good as" and "if not better than." Of the choices here,
only C is complete.
2. A. The original version is correct. With correlatives like "either . . . or," the same structure should follow each of
the conjunctions. You could also write "either in spring or in fall," but the original version is more brief.
3. B. The original sentence is a fragment, lacking a main verb. B corrects this error. The choice of preposition
("with" or "by") is not important. Both D and E are also sentence fragments.
4. E. Although the original version of this sentence is grammatical, the more direct active voice is a more vigorous
sentence using three fewer words.
5. D. This sentence is testing parallelism. It begins with two infinitives ("to record," "to understand") controlled by
the verb "set out." The best version simply repeats the infinitive ("to explain").
6. C. The sentence, as it stands, is a fragment. The main clause needs an indicative verb in the future tense.
7. C. The phrase that begins this sentence dangles, and A and B make it appear that the "speakeasy" and
"Hemingway" are the same. Though E is grammatical, the more concise C is the best choice here.
8. B. Three of the choices here use a pronoun ("this," "which," and "that") with no antecedent, that is, no specific
noun or pronoun to refer to. Only B avoids this problem.
9. D. Both D and E avoid the shift from the pronoun "one" at the beginning to "you." Since the original sentence
presents the finding as only a possibility ("may"), D is the better of the two choices since it does not change the
meaning.
10 . C. This is another test of parallelism with a series. Here the first two elements are noun phrases ("traffic delays,"
"access to pornography") that are objects of the verb "has." The parallel is a third object of this verb, "too many
self-centered babblers." The introduction of a second verb breaks up the parallelism.
11. A. The original sentence is correct. All of the four other choices have agreement errors ("pleases," "create,"
"create," and "please").
12 . B. To make sense, the sentence needs a conjunction like "but" that suggests a contrast between the first part
("adversaries") and the second ("personal relationship"). B is better than C because it avoids the wordier passive
voice.
13 . A. The original version is correct. It places the "not only" before "the birds," so that "not only" precedes the
parallel phrase "the plants." C places the "not only" properly, but has no main verb.
14 . C. As it stands, the sentence is run-on. The addition of "and" corrects the comma splice.
15 . C. The first two verbs in this sentence ("abducts" and "carries") are active, but the third verb is passive in A, B,
D, and E. C keeps all three verbs in the active voice. C is also the most economical of the five choices.
16 . E. Seeing the participle at the beginning of the sentence, the wise test-taker will check to see if the participle
dangles. Who yields to public demand? Not the end of a film or the lovers in a film. Only E supplies a human
agent that the participial phrase could logically modify.
17. B. Without a conjunction, A and E are comma splices. C is a run-on sentence. D changes the meaning by leaving
out the "may." By adding the conjunction "and," B corrects the comma splice.
18 . A. The original sentence is better than the four alternatives. It uses two parallel active verbs in the perfect tense.
In C, D, and E, the two verbs have different forms. B is a parallel structure but a wordier one than A, using eleven
words instead of seven.
Part III: About the PSAT/NMSQT
19 . C. If you focus on the phrase "an idea that . . . " you should hear the idiomatic rightness of "is easy to comprehend."
The adjective "easy" modifies the noun "idea." D also has the adjective "easy" but the idiom with "easy" is the
infinitive rather than the preposition and gerund.
20. B. The sentence is a fragment, lacking a main verb. Only B supplies the verb needed to make the sentence
complete.
Identifying Sentence Errors
21. B. Despite the distraction of the plural "experts," the subject here is the singular "report," so the verb should be
the singular "recommends."
22. A. Since the sentence uses "you" in the first clause, it should continue to use "you," not "one."
23. A. The adverb "virtually," not the adjective "virtual," should modify the adjective "every."
24. D. The present tense "spend" makes no sense with the phrase "this year and next"; the verb should be in the
future tense, "will spend."
25. B. With "neither . . . nor," the subject is singular, either James or Whistler, but not both. The parenthetical phrase
using "both" does not change this fact, so the verb should be the singular "was able."
26. E. This sentence is correct. Though an opening participle may often dangle, this one does not.
27. C. Since "hardly" is a negative, the "not" makes a double negative; it should be omitted.
28. B. This is an error in idiom. The sentence should read "punishes for" rather than "punishes in."
29. E. The sentence is correct. "London's subway system" and "that of Boston" are properly parallel.
30. B. This is another error in agreement. The plural "houses" requires the plural verb "mirror."
31. E. There are no errors in this sentence.
32. A. This sentence should read either "Like Shakespeare's, Whitman's writing" or "Like Shakespeare, Whitman
wrote" to maintain the logic of the comparison: writings to writings, or writer to writer.
33. B. As it stands, this is a sentence fragment, lacking a main verb. The participle "giving" should be "gives."
34. E. This sentence is correct.
Improving Paragraphs
35. C. The best version subordinates the second sentence, avoiding the repetition of the word "Thailand." The "but"
that replaces the "and" is a better choice of conjunction, since it emphasizes the difference between the two
birthplaces. The participle in D is out of place, and E has too many short sentences.
36. D. The original here is wordy since "has a long . . . history," "ancient," and "has been passed down from very
olden times" all say virtually the same thing. C is too short, since it is a fragment, lacking a main verb. The best
choice here is D.
37. D. In both A and B, the second sentence is a fragment. The future tense in C and the past tense in E are awkward;
both are inferior to D.
38. A. The second paragraph is about the coronation ceremony, but the fourth sentence is about the writer's grandparents.
The sentence can be omitted or moved to the first paragraph, where it logically follows the third sentence.
39. D. Though it requires more words, only D avoids the illogical comparison of a country (Thailand) and a musical
comedy (The King and I).
PSAT/NMSQT Practice Test
PSAT/NMSQT Practice Test
PSAT/NMSQT Score Range Approximator
The following charts are designed to give you only a very general approximate score range, not an exact score. When
you take the actual PSAT/NMSQT, you will see questions similar to those in this book; however, some questions may
be slightly easier or more difficult. Needless to say, this may affect your scoring range.
How to Approximate Your Score in Critical Reading
1. Add the total number of correct responses for the two Critical Reading sections.
2. Add the total number of incorrect responses (only those attempted or marked in) for those sections.
3. The total number of incorrect responses for the Critical Reading sections should be divided by 4, giving you an
adjustment factor (round off to the nearest whole number, if necessary).
4. Subtract this adjustment factor from the total number of correct responses to obtain a raw score.
5. This raw score is then scaled to a range of 20 through 80.
For example:
If the total number of correct answers was 30 out of a possible 48
and 16 problems were attempted but missed,
dividing 16 by 4 gives an adjustment factor of 4.
Subtracting this adjustment factor of 4 from the original 30 correct gives a raw score of 26.
This raw score is then scaled to a range of 20 through 80.
6. Using your scores:
correct answers wrong answers ÷ 4 raw score
7. Use the following table to match your raw score for Critical Reading and the corresponding approximate score range:
Raw Score Approximate Score Range
Keep in mind that this is only an approximate score range.
How to Approximate Your Score in Mathematics
1. Add the total number of correct responses for the two Mathematics sections.
2. Add the total number of incorrect responses for the multiple-choice questions.
3. The total number of incorrect responses for these multiple-choice questions should be divided by 4, giving you an
adjustment factor for multiple choice (round off to the nearest whole number).
4. Subtract this adjustment factor from the total number of correct responses to obtain a raw score.
5. This raw score is then scaled to a range of 20 through 80.
For example:
If the total number of correct answers was 20 out of a possible 38,
and 8 multiple-choice problems were attempted but missed,
dividing 8 by 4 gives an adjustment factor of 2 for multiple choice.
Subtracting this adjustment factor of 2 from the original 20 correct gives a raw score of 18.
Part III: About the PSAT/NMSQT
6. Using your scores:
correct answers wrong answers ÷ 4 raw score
Note: You receive no deduction for incorrect grid-in responses.
7. Use the following table to match your raw score for Mathematics and the corresponding approximate score range:
Raw Score Approximate Score Range
Keep in mind that this is only an approximate score range.
How to Approximate Your Score in Writing Skills
1. Add the total number of correct responses for the Writing Skills section.
2. Add the total number of incorrect responses (only those attempted or marked in) for that section.
3. The total number of incorrect responses for the Writing Skills section should be divided by 4, giving you an
adjustment factor (round off to the nearest whole number, if necessary).
4. Subtract this adjustment factor from the total number of correct responses to obtain a raw score.
5. This raw score is then scaled to a range of 20 through 80.
For example:
If the total number of correct answers was 25 out of a possible 39
and 12 problems were attempted but missed,
dividing 12 by 4 gives an adjustment factor of 3.
Subtracting this adjustment factor of 3 from the original 25 correct gives a raw score of 22.
6. Using your scores:
correct answers wrong answers ÷ 4 raw score
7. Use the following table to match your raw score for Writing Skills and the corresponding approximate score range:
Raw Score Approximate Score Range
Keep in mind that this is only an approximate score range.
List of Sources
Sincere appreciation is given to the following authors and companies for allowing the use of excerpts from their out-
standing works.
Pauline Kael. Originally published in Harper's magazine.
Wesley Publishing Company, Inc.
Theodore Roszack.
"The Graduate," by Andrew Sarris, reprinted by permission of the author and The Village Voice.
"Control of Rabies in Wildlife," by William G. Winkler and Konrad Bogel, reprinted by permission of Scientific
"Early Results from the Hubble Space Telescope," by Eric J. Chaison, reprinted by permission of Scientific American.
"MEDIASPEAK: How Television Makes Up Your Mind," by Donna Woolfolk Cross. Reprinted by permission of The
"The Joy of Music," by Leonard Bernstein, reprinted by permission of The Robert Lantz-Joy Harris Literary Agency.
The Mysterious History of Columbus, by John Noble Wilford, reprinted by permission of Alfred A. Knopf, Inc.
"Global Warming on Trial," from Natural History, by Wallace S. Broecker, reprinted by permission of American
by Alfred A. Knopf, Inc.
"Gene Swapping," from Bacterial Gene Swapping in Nature,by Robert V . Miller. Scientific American,V olume 278, No. 1,
January 1998 (p. 66).
The Launching of Modern American Science, 1846-1876 by Robert Bruce. Alfred A. Knopf, Inc., New York, 1987
List of Sources
Women in Science, by Vivian Gornick. Simon & Schuster, New York, 1984 (pp. 70-71).
Asian American Literature: An Introduction to the Writings and Their Social Context,by Elaine H. Kim, Temple
University Press, Philadelphia. 1982 (pp. 23-24).
Additional Resources
Cliffs Math Review for Standardized Tests,by Jerry Bobrow, Ph.D. Wiley Publishing, Inc., Hoboken, New Jersey, 1985.
CliffsQuickReview Basic Math and Pre-Algebra,by Jerry Bobrow, Ph.D. Wiley Publishing, Inc., Hoboken, New Jersey,
CliffsQuickReview Algebra I, by Jerry Bobrow, Ph.D. Wiley Publishing, Inc., Hoboken, New Jersey, 2001.
Cliffs Verbal Review for Standardized Tests,by William A. Covino, Ph.D., and Peter Z. Orton, M. Ed. Wiley Publishing,
Inc., Hoboken, New Jersey, 1986.
Final Preparation
The Final Touches
1. Make sure that you are familiar with the testing center location and nearby parking facilities.
2. Spend your last few days of preparation primarily reviewing strategies, techniques, and directions for each area.
3. Don't "cram" the night before the exam. It's a waste of time!
4. Remember to bring the proper materials to the test: identification, admission ticket, three or four sharpened no. 2
pencils, a watch, a good eraser, and an approved calculator.
5. On the new SAT, the first section will be the writing assignment-the essay.
6. Keep in mind the writing process-prewriting, writing, and proofreading.
7. On the multiple-choice questions, start off crisply, first working the questions you know and then coming back
and trying the other questions.
8. If you can eliminate one or more of the choices, make an educated guess.
9. Mark in reading passages, underline key words, write out information, and make notations on diagrams. Take
advantage of being permitted to write in the test booklet.
10. Make sure that you are answering "what is being asked" and that your answer is reasonable.
11. Remember that within each question type, the math questions generally progress from easier to more difficult.
12. Using the Successful Overall Approaches (see Introduction, pages 6-8) is the key to getting the answers right that
you should get right-resulting in a good score on the new SAT and PSAT/NMSQT.

The quick brown fox jumps over the lazy dog. Pack my box with 5 dozen liquor jugs. How vexingly quick daft zebras jump! The five boxing wizards jump quickly. Sphinx of black quartz, judge my vow. Waltz, bad nymph, for quick jigs vex. Glib jocks quiz nymph to vex dwarf. In 2024 we had 100 items. Dr. Smith said: "Hello!" Names like Alice and Bob. Uppercase and lowercase matter here.

MyeNoea ee
paca HR
Rtvie a
iy
HN thi}
= a
New Pocket Classics
Treasure Island
LD
COMBINATION VOLUMES
LONGFELLOW'S Evangeline
WHITTIER'S Snow-Bound & Other Poems
WSO New Pocket Classics yx |
LoncrELLow's The Courtship of Miles
Standish é& Minor Poems
LowEL's The Vision of Sir Launfal
Coreripce's The Ancient Mariner, Kubla
Khan, and Christabel
ARNOLD's Sohkrab and Rustum
Scotr's The Lady of the Lake
Scott's The Lay of the Last Minstrel
SHAKESPEARE'S The Merchant of Venice
SHAKESPEARE'S A Midsummer Night's
Dream
SHAKESPEARE'S Julius Caesar
SHAKESPEARE'S As You Like It
SINGLE VOLUMES
Brownino's Shorter Poems
Extot's Silas Marner
Irvine's The Sketch Book
Scott's Ivanhoe
Selections from the Old Testament
STEVENSON's Treasure Island
Digitized by the Internet Archive
in 2022 with funding from
Kahle/Austin Foundation
https://archive.org/details/treasureisland0000robe_h2e6
TREASURE TROVE
Robert
Louis
Stevenson
ff
SP TS
Edited by Hiram Albert Vance
Revised by H.Y. Moffett
Illustrated by Warwick Goble
acm illan
(Company
By Tue Macmitran Company
the right. of reproduction
in whole or in part.
in any form
Set up and electrotyped. Published December, 1902.
Revised edition with illustrations published September, 1929.
PREFATORY NOTE
THE inclusion of Treasure Island in this se-
ries needs no justification. It is fully estab-
lished as an essential of the high-school course;
while we may find substitutes for almost any
other ''classic," we should not know where to
search for a substitute for Treasure Island. It
is a story that should be read while one is very
young; accordingly, its place in the course
should be low. The first reading should be
rapid, almost breathless, sweeping the reader
along past thrilling climax after thrilling climax
to the close. After this introductory experience,
the pupil should be required to return and read
again, on the lookout for sources of pleasure
other than that of mere thrilling action. He
should study one after another of the principal
characters, to see what they really are; he
should test the consistency of their behavior
and their interaction; he should be led to ad-
mire the brilliant handling of narrative and
description; he should be inspired with admira-
tion for Stevenson the man, with his inimitable
personality and his gallant life; he should be
vii
Vili PREFATORY NOTE
introduced to other specimens of the author's
work. The biographical materials should be
used, but not abused. The notes should serve
the purpose of clarifying meanings and clear-
ing away obstacles to the fullest appreciation.
He Yeon
CONTENTS
PREFATORY NOTE
PAGE
vil
INTRODUCTION bal 4
BIBLIOGRAPHY XXXViii
TREASURE ISLAND
To THE HESITATING PURCHASER . 2
PARTI. THE OLD BUCCANEER
Map or TREASURE ISLAND . 4
CHAPTER
I. The Old Sea Dog at the "Admiral
Benbow" : 5
II. Black Dog Appears « and Disap-
pears. ars
III. The Black Spot . 25
IV. The Sea-Chest 36
V. The Last of the Blind Man 45
VI. The Captain's Papers 54
PART II. THE SEA COOK
VII. I Go to Bristol 65
VIII. At the Sign of the "Spyglass" 73
IX. Powder and Arms 81
X. The Voyage : 89
XI. What I Heard in the Apple I Barrel 98
XII. Council of War . 107
ix
x CoNTENTS
CHAPTER PAGE
PART III. MY SHORE ADVENTURE
XIII. How My Shore Adventure Pees 117
XIV. The First Blow . ; : 12,7
XV. The Man of the Island Appa saonet ys:
PART IV. THE STOCKADE
XVI. Narrative Continued by the Doc-
tor: How the Ship Was Aban-
doned . 151
XVII. Narrative Continued by the Doc-
tor: The Jollyboat's Last Trip 161
XVIII. Narrative Continued by the Doc-
tor: End of the First Day's
Fighting : 168
XIX. Narrative Resumed by Jim Haw- |
kins: The Garrison in the
- Stockade ; : : weg aS
XX. Silver's Embassy : : . 184
XXI. The Attack : : ; 5 SLOG
PART V. MY SEA ADVENTURE
XXIT. How My Sea Adventure Began . 209
XXIII. The Ebb-Tide Runs . : es
XXIV. The Cruise of the Coracle . 7225
XXV. I Strike the Jolly Bue : - 236
XXVI. Israel Hands . : 2 Byer.
XXVII. "Pieces of Eight" Sanit 3 Beets
PART VI. CAPTAIN SILVER
XXVIII. In the Enemy's Camp : oy 2
XXIX. The Black Spot ae ; i. 283m
XXX. On Parole . : , = 208
CHAPTER
XXXII.
XXXII.
XXXITI.
XXXIV.
Notes .
CoNTENTS
The Treasure Hunt - Flint's
Pointer . ' : : ;
The Treasure Hunt-The Voice
among the Trees
The Fall of a Chieftain
And Last .
xi
PAGE
ash le +
te SS Levan 4 Da ? .
me y . ay ¥ ae re an $, % 4q ats ara
( STN! aes ges nf
) ; i Ph oo Mente Pith:
= Bah td
ILLUSTRATIONS
PAGE
Treasure Trove. : : ; Frontispiece
Jim Leading Pew to Billy Bones . : re
Long John Going from Group to Group meg
The First Blow. ; : ' ; = #032
_The Captain, the Squire, andI . 5 = 05
The Attack : ' ; : : 1) 109
The Cruise of the Coracle . ; : See
Jim and Israel Hands . é : F i255
The Black Spot Again : é : e285
Flint's Pointer. : ' 5 : Bikes
The Empty Cache : - 3 : eT
iii
INTRODUCTION
Ropert Lewis BALFoUR STEVENSON * was
born November 13, 1850, at Edinburgh, Scot-
land, and died December 3, 1894, at Apia in
the Samoan Islands. He was the only child of
Thomas Stevenson, a man of "blended stern-
ness and softness that was wholly Scottish,"
and of his wife Margaret Isabella, the youngest
daughter of the Reverend James Balfour of the
parish of Colinton in Midlothian. The Steven-
sons for two generations had been civil engi-
neers, and had held the honorable position of
engineers to the Board of Northern Lighthouses
-the grandfather, Robert, building the famous
Bell Rock Lighthouse and the father, Thomas
-under his brother Alan-the Skerryvore, "the
noblest of all extant deep-sea lights'; and it
was thought that the latest born of this race
should maintain the tradition of the family
and succeed to the office of his father. And
later, when it was found that he had profited
'Tt was some time about his eighteenth year that the
author began to sign himself Robinson Louis Stevenson;
although it is said, in the pronunciation of his intimate
friends he was still called Lewis.
XV
Xvi INTRODUCTION
lit 'e by his studies and had small taste for
engineering, it was again decided for him that
the law rather than literature offered a pro-
fession more in keeping with his station and
his father's notion of an honorable career. But
in the case of Stevenson, as in that of many
another in whom the current toward letters
has run strong, these plans miscarried; and he
filled a place and reached a renown little
dreamed of at the outset.
He inherited from his father a genial humor,
a touch of Celtic melancholy, a sensitive con-
science, a fondness for dogmatic statement, and
a love for romance and for open-air activity;
from his mother, a brilliancy, vivacity, and
native grace, and a feminine sensitiveness to
impressions; from her, likewise, a frail body
and a predisposition to pulmonary disease,
which he never outgrew, and which condemned
him to a life of invalidism. From his second
year he was much in bed; and that morbid
sense of self which in a healthy body is soon
lost sight of, he had always to struggle with.
But the myriad impressions .from without that
came crowding in upon his "full-blooded spirit"
enabled him to exercise his morbid impulses
with a wholesome restraint and to coin his
life's best into living words of cheer, which
gave to all his writing its chief charm and to
his personality a peculiar human interest. For
INTRODUCTION xvii
nowhere have those childish interests-the. "n-
terests of the natural man-more completely
filled grown-up effort: nowhere have those
visions of childhood, with their wonder and
glory, been better preserved-to mention but
one book-than in A Child's Garden of Verse
by this child of thirty-five. Thus out of "The
Land of Counterpane"
"T watched my leaden soldiers go,
With different uniforms and drills,
Among the bed-clothes, through the hills:
"And sometimes sent my ships in fleets
All up and down among the sheets;
Or brought my trees and houses out,
And planted cities all about."
His school days, which began in 1857, were
much broken in consequence of his ill health;
but he attended with more or less regularity
several schools in the neighborhood of his home:
first Mr. Henderson's preparatory school, then
the Edinburgh Academy, and finally the day
school of Mr. Thomson. In these, together with
one term at a boarding school at Spring Grove,
Ilesworth, in Middlesex, and with much private
tutoring at home and abroad, he completed his
preparation for the University of Edinburgh,
which he entered in 1867. But his education
was not confined to the school room, for he
Xvili INTRODUCTION
early began those travels that finally took him
far afield. In 1857 he visited with his parents
the English lakes; and in 1862, London and the
south of England, and spent a part of the same
summer at Homburg. The winter of 1863 the
Stevensons spent at Mentone; and in the fol-
lowing spring they made a tour through Italy,
Switzerland, and Germany, visiting in their
itinerary Genoa, Naples, Rome, Florence, Ven-
ice, Innsbriick, and the Rhine region. The next
spring finds Stevenson with his mother again in
the Riviera, and the two following springs with
her at Torquay in Devonshire, England. While
we find in his writings no direct reference to
these travels, their influence upon this impres-
sionable youth and future writer-for he then
had the purpose of making of himself a writer
-must have been incalculable. And we know
that at least one scene from these travels, the
Brenner Pass, lives again in his incomparable
"Will o'? the Mill" in a manner unknown to
histories or guide-books.
Up to this time, however, there was in his
attempts at writing nothing remarkable. He
had, to be sure, composed in his sixth year a
"History of Moses''; he had acquired the habit,
when about fourteen, of extemporizing doggerel
verse and of starting magazines in manuscript
which contained stories filled with horrors; and
he had written, when but sixteen, ""The Pent-
INTRODUCTION xix
land Rising," which has been dignified by a
place in the complete edition of his works. Yet
these efforts contain nothing that might not
have been expected of any clever boy, romantic
in temperament and much alone, who felt the
need of self-expression. But much more re-
markable were the impressions of those years
which waited for fuller utterance, and which
found it in Memories and Portraits and in
other of his works.
But his university career, while it did not
contribute so much to his formal education, had
an important bearing upon his future, and was
the beginning of what may be called his real
education. His health had now become so far
improved that he was no longer hindered in his
studies; and he took a young man's interest in
the life about him. At first he studied Latin,
Greek, and natural philosophy; but soon Greek
gave place to mathematics, and later Latin to
engineering; and he usually spent a part of his
summers in shops and yards, or on inspecting
tours, which were to familiarize him with the
more practical side of his profession as engi-
neer. In none of these activities, however, could
his effort be called assiduous; and no one, as he
affirms, "ever had more certificates (of atten-
dance) for less education."' Indeed the occasion
offered him not so much an opportunity for
fitting himself for his father's profession as '"'a
XX INTRODUCTION
way of life"; and he busied himself far less
with the subjects of the lecture-room than with
that "system of truantry, which cost him a deal
of trouble to put in exercise." And the particu-
lar way waves had of impinging upon a harbor-
bar was far less interesting to him than the din
of the surf in the distance, the scent of the salt
wind in his nostrils, or the thrilling sense. of
physical danger.
The companionship, too, of those years filled
a want that could not be wholly satisfied by
books. And the "high jinks," the exercise in
the open air, the laughter (the mere expression
of animal spirit), and the talk big with purpose
and varied in scope were all wholesome; for
they broke a '"'miserable isolation," and helped
Stevenson to discover himself. It was at this
time that his cousin, R. A. M. Stevenson, an
Oxford student, a man of the world, and a
brilliant talker," was much with him; and it
was his mere coming that "changed," as Steven-
son declared, ''at once and forever the course
of my life." Others who shared this comrade-
ship were Charles Baxter, the faithful adviser
and constant friend; James Walter Ferrier,
gentle and gifted, who figures in "Old Mor-
* Spring-Heel'd Jack of "Talk and Talkers": Memories and Portraits. In the same essay W. E. Henley is disguised as Burley, Jenkin as Cockshot, Simpson as Athelred, and J. A. Symonds as Opalstein, ,
INTRODUCTION Xxi
tality";* Sir Walter Simpson, with whom he
made An Inland Voyage; and Fleeming Jen-
kin,' his professor of engineering. These were
men of rich personalities, yet of different types;
and each gave to his friend of his best, and
helped to create an atmosphere, free from re-
straint, in which it was a pleasure to breathe.
Yet these years were not altogether years of
gayety to Stevenson. The conscious purpose of
life weighed heavily with him. And the insolent
way youth has of disposing of grave problems
caused him not joy but sorrow, since it gave
pain to others. A thing that weighed heavily
with him was his conduct toward his father in
the matter of his profession. This, happily, was
soon mended; for during a memorable week in
April, 1871, shortly after he had read his paper
"On a New Form of Intermittent Light"-his
one contribution to the profession-he un-
bosomed himself to his father, made clear to
him his distaste for engineering, and sought his
consent to follow the profession of letters.
While this consent in part was withheld, and
it was agreed that Louis was to fit himself in-
stead for the Scottish Bar, it was nevertheless
understood that the law was only to serve him
as a livelihood should he ever be in want and
letters fail him, as his father feared they might.
1 Memories and Portraits, p. 50.
*Cf. Memoir of Fleeming Jenkin.
XXxil INTRODUCTION
Then, with the atmosphere thus cleared, he
entered upon his career with more earnestness.
He attended the law lectures at the University,
entered the office of a law firm as clerk, was
admitted to the practice of the profession in
1875, and then waited for clients. But the real
business of those years, as it had been of those
before, was the making of himself a writer; and
the freedom from the routine of professional
life, which the absence of clients now assured
him, was not unwelcome. And with the same
avidity as he had pursued the task of writing
(an account of which he has given us in "A
College Magazine'"') * he still pursued his prep-
aration for authorship. And for the next five
years we find him, in essay, and in notes on
travel, and later in the short story, winning his
~ way with the public.
The year 1873-74 was a memorable one in
Stevenson's career. It marked the beginning of
that enduring friendship with Mr. Sidney Col-
vin which became such a spur to his literary
endeavor and which had its monument in the
Vailima Letters. It was also in this year that
his first accepted article, "Roads," saw light in
The Portfolio; and it was likewise in this same
year that he learned of the threatening weak-
ness of the lungs which sent him again for the
* Memories and Portraits.
INTRODUCTION Xxlil
winter to the Riviera-and of this sojourn, all
he saw and thought and felt he gave the next
spring in 'Ordered South." * Mr. Colvin, who
had joined him in December at Mentone, intro-
duced him to another helpful friend, Mr. An-
drew Lang. On his return to Edinburgh the
next spring-after a brief stay with R. A. M.
Stevenson, who was now studying art at Paris
-he happily found his parents reconciled to
his way of life, and, what was likewise sig-
nificant, himself the possessor of an allowance
ample enough to insure him freedom of action.
Thereafter we find him dividing his time be-
tween Scotland, England and France-seeking
the intercourse of literary men in the Old Savile
Club at London, and the haunts of artists in
and about the forest of Fontainebleau, or tak-
ing excursions afoot, or with canoe or donkey.
And all this time, true to the business in hand,
he was enlarging his reputation, if as yet with
a limited public, at least with some of the best
editors in England.
At Grez, upon his return from An Inland
Voyage, he met in 1876 Mrs. Osbourne, an
American lady who had suffered the loss of
domestic happiness in California, and had
sought with her two children such solace as a
change of scene and the study of art might
bring in France. The meeting was of the utmost
1Virginibus Puerisque.
XXiv INTRODUCTION
significance to both; for here was the woman
for whom three years later Stevenson braved
strange fortune and parental displeasure; whom
he crossed half the world to meet; and who,
on her part was to be such a helpful friend and
devoted wife.
In the meanwhile, fiction, which was to take
more and more the place of the essay in his
writings, appeared first in 1877 in "A Lodging
for the Night." In the following year appeared
his first book;? also his first serial publications,
New Arabian Nights, and Picturesque Notes
on Edinburgh, and "Will 'o the Mill," which
showed great originality of conception and a
mastery of style, and which is still regarded by
many as his best short story. This was likewise
the year of Mrs. Osbourne's return to America,
and of Stevenson's week's trip through the
Cévennes, which was set forth the next June in
Travels with a Donkey. And now we hear of
him first here then there-at London and at
his father's country home at Swanston, col-
laborating in the play, Deacon Brodie, with
Mr. W. E. Henley (whom he first met in a
hospital at Edinburgh in 1874), or visiting with
Mr. George Meredith. Then he crossed to
France and planned a trip to the Pyrenees, but
his heart was elsewhere, and he returned. Then,
1 New Arabian Nights.
2 An Inland Voyage.
INTRODUCTION XXV
against the advice of his friends, and without
that of his family, he set sail in August, 1879,
for New York, and gained that experience which
is recorded in The Amateur Emigrant and
Across the Plains.
In California came the breakdown. The
leave-taking from his friends, the uncertainty
of his own future, the disquieting news of Mrs.
Osbourne's ill health, and the hardships of the
long journey had so shaken him that he reached
San Francisco late in August in a state of
nervous exhaustion. Then came another jour-
ney of one hundred and fifty miles south to
the Coast Range beyond Monterey, where he
thought to regain his health by camping alone
in the open air. But his overtaxed strength
here gave way; and for two nights, which
might have been his last had he not been res-
cued by two goatherds, he lay under a tree in
a stupor. He mended, however, remained in
Monterey till the middle of December, and
then went to San Francisco to begin his hand-
to-hand struggle with life itself.
To husband his scant funds he lodged him-
self in a single room, and living at a cost of
seventy cents a day, plunged into work; but
the quality of the work which he sent home,
while it was acceptable to editors, did not meet
the approving judgment of his friends. How-
ever, remittances could not be delayed, and he
XXVi INTRODUCTION
had no other choice but to work the harder.
In the meantime his correspondence with his
family had been brief and unsatisfactory. His
father, ill informed of his son's affairs, naturally
took a gloomy view of his conduct. To add to
this discomfiture, his funds were now failing
him, and disease, which was making rapid in-
roads on his health, was leading him danger-
ously near "the grey ferry." Yet in all this
trying experience-estranged from family, poor,
and broken in health-he never lost heart, nor
once turned his back on his resolution. At
length the skies grew brighter. His health im-
proved with cheering news from home. And
with an assured income of one hundred and
fifty pounds a year from his father, and with
the legal bar to their union removed, he was
married to Mrs. Osbourne on the roth of May,
1880; then after a stay with his wife and
stepson at a deserted mining town fifty miles
north of San Francisco-the scene of The
Silverado Squatters-he turned eastward with
his family, and sailed for Liverpool on the date
of his embarkation for the United States the
year before.
But his return was not for long; for it was
now evident that he could not withstand the
rigor of the northern winters. And thereafter,
an exile in quest of health, he spent the next -
two winters at Davos Platz, a part of another
INTRODUCTION XXvli
at Marseilles, a year at Hyéres-the happiest
of his life; then, to be near his father who was
now in failing health, three more at Bourne-
mouth, where he "lived like a weevil in a bis-
cuit," and Europe was to see him no more.
Then after another brief sojourn in America,
and after three cruises, he built for himself a
home in an island of the far seas, where he
was to spend the rest of his days.
But the writer was now made; for while he
went on revealing himself more and more in
his writings, giving even in his unfinished work
the promise of a robuster art, the outgrowth of
a more significant view of life, he finished
Treasure Island, which was to make his reputa-
tion with the larger public. Of the making of
this tale he has left us a complete record in
"My First Book." *
It.was begun in September at Braemar, and
had its inception in a map of an odd-shaped
island-they called it "Treasure Island"-
which he drew one day from fancy to amuse
his stepson. But so fascinated was he by this
drawing, and such was his sense of the pic-
turesque, that almost immediately characters
began to appear and to express for him the
peculiar romantic atmosphere that seemed to
invest it. From the list of chapters that was
soon written out-a thing that he had often
1Written for McClure's Magazine, Vol. 3, p. 283.
XXVili INTRODUCTION
done before for other stories without proceed-
ing much farther-John Silver, the genial,
brave, strong, and conscienceless adventurer,
stepped forth and began to live among his
fellows. He had written successful short stories,
but here was the material for a long one; a
boy's book of adventure, with little plot, no
love, nor any conscience at all: just pictures,
the open air, the sea, a buried treasure, the
eternal, youthful spirit of hope and physical
courage. And with a boy for an audience-to
which his father soon joined himself, and even
furnished the list of articles in Billy Bones's
chest, and gave to '"'Flint's old ship" the name
of Walrus-he wrote in fifteen days a like
number of chapters of what was then called
The Sea Cook, which he read in the evenings
for the entertainment of the assembled family.
Fortunately at one of these readings Dr. Japp'
was present as guest; and such was his delight
with the tale that when he left he bore away
with him a copy of the first few chapters of it
to his friend, Mr. Henderson, the editor of
Young Folks. The story was readily accepted;
and it began its serial existence the same
autumn. But with the same suddenness with
which the tale had started, it broke down in
the middle; and it was not till Stevenson had
reached Davos that one day he sat down at
* Alexander Hay Japp, editor and author.
INTRODUCTION XXix
the return of a second flood of inspiration, and
finished it at the old rate of a chapter a day.
Its existence in the magazine was obscure,
and called from the critics only scant and un-
favorable notices; but at its appearance in
book form in December, 1883, the public hailed
it with delight. It had been written for boys;
but now sedate men were sitting up past bed-
time reading with rapt interest this book of
boyish adventure. From that time to this, it
has remained his most popular book. In 1892
his old friend, Sir Leslie Stephen-a critic to
whose opinion we like to defer-said: "Treasure
Island is the one story [of Stevenson's|] which
I can admire without the least qualification or
reserve. The aim may not be the highest, but it
is attained with the most thorough success. It
may be described as a 'Message' in the sense
that it appeals to the boyish element... .
We believe in it as we believe in Robinson
Crusoe." *
But this book did more than bring him an
audience; it revealed to him the mood, the
method, and the material, with which he could
deal with success. And thereafter followed,
without further hesitancy, The Black Arrow
(1883), Prince Otto (1885), Kidnapped
1For Stevenson's defence of this story, see "A Humble
Remonstrance": Memories and Portraits, pp. 286 ff.
? National Review, 1892.
XXX INTRODUCTION
(1886), The Master of Ballantrae (1888), The
Wrecker (1891), David Balfour (1893), The
Ebb Tide (1893), and the unfinished St. Ives
and Weir of Hermiston; besides poems, short
stories, essays, letters of travel, biography, and
notes on history.
Among his best short stories are: "Will 0'
the Mill," '""Markheim," "Thrawn Janet," "The
Pavilion on the Links," "The Treasure of Fan-
chard," "The Merry Men," 'The Strange Case
of Dr. Jekyll and Mr. Hyde," "The Sire de
Malétréit's Door," and "The Beach of Falesa."
But in none of his longer stories save in Prince
Otto and in Weir of Hermiston, where we have
the element of character subordinated to that
of plot, did he materially change his method of
treatment. They are either 'a certain atmos-
phere" expressed and realized by persons and
actions, or characters developed by incidents
and situations; * for he loved "the art of words
and the appearance of things," and it was late
when he learned to fit characters successfully
to a plot with an underlying motif.
The major passion, therefore, found little
place in his stories; and his few women were
not altogether satisfactorily drawn. For it was
not love with its rewards and circumscribed
plots and self-sufficiency that best suited
Stevenson's genius; but life with a hazard-life
*Cf. Balfour's Life of Stevenson, Vol. II. p. 168.
INTRODUCTION XXxi
under an open sky and on a broad field, full
of struggle and "'tail-foremost morality"; life
so circumstanced that the characters, driven
forward through clean open-air adventure, act
their parts in obedience to natural impulses and
practical intelligence without the hesitations of
conscience or the halting at questions of con-
duct. The realities of life, confined within con-
ventional society and set forth with a conscious
moral purpose, were subjects which his genius
shunned as his spirit shunned the sickroom.
They furnish the essential underlying idea to
the dramatic novel and to the novel of char-
acter, but they offered him none of that spon-
taneity of action which could give employ to
his buoyant spirit and graceful fancy. On the
other hand, let the inn at Burford Bridge, or
the old Hawes Inn at the Queen's Ferry,' but
speak to him and there would rise to his mind
a tale, epically conceived, fitted to the narrative
mood and filled with the poetry of romance, in
which the dominant note would be courage;
and "to be brave, to be honest, to be kind, and
to be contented" would be the sum of human
virtue. Thus it needed but a buried treasure, a
wide sea, and a fair fight for him to weave a
tale as full of the spirit of youth and manly
daring as it is rich in imagination and perfect
*Cf. "A Gossip on Romance": Memories and Portraits,
pp. 253 fi.
XXxil INTRODUCTION
in form. Or set David Balfour * for him some-
where on a desert isle, and get him mixed up
somehow in a Highland murder and pursued
with Alan Breck by British soldiers, and again
you have life with a hazard, into which he will
infuse the whole spirit of the Highlands: the
color of the sky, the scent of the heather, the
joy of falling water, the weariness of fatigue,
the pangs of hunger-all instinct with life and
throbbing with a full-pulsed vigor, in which
Jacobite daring is set off against Whiggish cau-
tion, yet both united in a friendship born of
common dangers and of the physical joys of
living.
It was somewhere in this sunny field of life,
away from those common experiences that tor-
ture and slay, that his fancy delighted to linger;
somewhere where he could lose the distressing
sense of self in boisterous and robust activity;
somewhere where he could people incidents
with real men and women, and feel the thrill of
human kinship and satisfy a nameless longing.
It was a limited view of life, and lacking in
the highest purpose; and the method which he
chose to fit to it became rather fixed with him.
But when he had found the matter that fitted
perfectly his narrative method, he could throw
himself with such abandon into his work, he
*Cf{. Kidnapped.
INTRODUCTION XXXili
could fill it all with such a vivid imagination,
such a wonderful feeling for beauty, such a
magnanimous spirit and a desperate courage
and a wholesome morality, that the art that
thus passed through the alembic of his person-
ality seemed akin to that of the flight of a bird,
and had in it some of the gladness of the sky.
Stevenson came at a time of "spiritual fa-
tigue"; when literature had lost much of its
freshness and vigor, and was busy puzzling out
the weightier problems of existence; when even
novelists were laboriously setting forth grave
theories, or making commonplace photogravures
of life-seeking not so much to interest by
their art as to inform by their matter. The
world, long since wearied by introspections and
abstractions, was ready to turn away from
gloomy forebodings to a more joyous mood.
And it was well that at this time there came
one with laughter on his lips and with sweet-
ness in his heart to help guide the spiritual
currents into healthy and natural ways; one
who had no theory of life to expound, no pro-
test to make; who found his interest not so
much in life as in joyous, spontaneous living
-"earth not grey but rosy," and was bravely
glad to make the best of it. And the whole-
hearted way that he contributed to the wealth
of existence in these exquisite stories of adven-
ture, by which he led perplexed and tired souls
XXXIV INTRODUCTION
away from the distressing sense of self to the
virtues in the natural man, and thus helped to
make a great reaction "sane and sweet," is
Stevenson's inestimable service to his age. "It
was a return to run-wild elemental nature, to
the stratum below the conventionalisms and
artificialities of life; and it was made in the
healthiest, least disturbing way possible; not
by denial or even propaganda, not by a picnic
return_to nature like Rousseau's but by simply
harking back to the buoyant youthfulness that
still survives in all of us-das Ewigjugendliche.
In youth, and in the spirit of youthfulness, we
dare to let our blood bound and our untor-
mented conscience carry off the experiences
that come. We trust ourselves to the impulses
of a period that has not yet become morbid and
introspective. Full of energy this morning spirit
is, but it is the energy of a large and joyous
scale of living; a noble manhood-energy which
is its own excuse for being. Such was the vital
truth that Stevenson was concerned to set
forth; and no lesson ever came in better time." *
It was much to master the technique of a
literary style and to write a story marred in no
respect by mawkish sentiment or by dreary
descriptions, nor laden with a conscious moral
purpose; but one in which every detail of plot,
character, and incident was so skilfully handled
*Stevenson's Attitude to Life, by John Franklin Genung.
INTRODUCTION XXXV
as to contribute to a definite unity of effect in
the whole, and to carry the reader out of him-
self by the interest of the telling. It was more
to seize upon those primary qualities in man's
nature and set them forth in incidents so stir-
ring as to idealize active virtues and to glorify
mere living. Yet Stevenson did more than this.
He affected powerfully the letters of his time;
and that healthy spirit of animalism-and shall
we not say much of that refinement of form-
which we enjoy in the best writers of the pres-
ent had its beginning with him. "The most
inspiriting, the most fascinating human being
I have ever known," one?' called him; another *
declared that "when he lived he moved men to
put their utmost into writings that quite cer-
tainly would never meet his eye, [and that for
five years before his death] the needle of liter-
ary endeavor in Great Britain quivered towards
a little island in the South Pacific, as to its
magnetic pole." And he taught, no less by his
life than by his letter, that true art, like perfect
service, is the unconscious revelation of per-
sonality.
He held that "Acts may be forgiven: not.
even God can forgive the hanger-back." *
Again: "It is better to lose health like a spend-
*Edmund Gosse.
* A. T. Quiller-Couch.
*It was the opposite of this maxim that "Will 'o the
Mill" acted on.
XXXVI INTRODUCTION
thrift than to waste it like a miser. It is better
to live and be done with it, than to die daily in
the sickroom. By all means begin your folio;
even if the doctor does not give you a year,
even if he hesitates about a month, make one
brave push and see what can be accomplished
in a week. It is not only in finished under-
takings that we ought to honor useful labor.
A spirit goes out of the man who means execu-
tion which outlives the most untimely ending.
All who have meant good work with their whole
hearts, have done good work, although they
may die before they have time to sign it.'"* His
whole life was an earnest of this; and no part
of it more so than the ending.
He left England in 1887, immediately after
the death of his father, and first sought health
in the Adirondacks. But he found the climate
here too severe; and the next June he began
those cruises (first in the yacht Casco, then in
the traders Equator and Janet Nicoll) ,'? which
during the next two and a half years took him
to most of the principal islands of the Eastern
and Central Pacific, and finally to Samoa,
where he bought a large tract of land two miles
behind the town of Apia, and six hundred feet
above it, and built him a home there. The way
in which he here employed his "inch of life'"-
+ Virginibus Puerisque, p. 169.
*Cfi. In the South Seas.
INTRODUCTION XXXVIi
rejoicing in labor, taking the keenest pleasure
in possession, gathering about him a family,
and planning for the future-is chronicled in
the Vailima Letters. It was a time of political
disturbance and of grave disquietude in the
island. But when he saw the natives lying help-
less, despoiled of their rights, and misjudged
and misgoverned by a selfish foreign official-
dom, the invalid in quest of life, unmindful of
his own dangers, even threatened with deporta-
tion, flung himself, with a courage that was
ever the charm of his personality, into inter-
national politics; and like a splendid prodigal,
he spent without stint of his husbanded store of
strength in the interests of justice and human-
ity." Out of this enriched experience he was
giving us Weir of Hermiston, which promised
to be his masterpiece, when the end came that
December evening in 1894. The next day, he
was buried above his Vailima home on the sum-
mit of the Vaea mountain, far away from the
graves of his fathers. There they erected to
him a rude monument, and engraved on it his
own "Requiem":
"Under the wide and starry sky,
Dig the grave and let me lie,
Glad did I live and gladly die,
And I laid me down with a will.
See "Letters to The Times"; A Footnote to History;
also the Letters of this period.
XXXVIli INTRODUCTION
"This be the verse you grave for me:
Here he lies where he longed to be;
Home is the sailor, home from sea,
And the hunter home from the hill."
BIBLIOGRAPHY
The Works of Robert Louis Stevenson, pub-
lished in twenty-five volumes by Charles
Scribner's Sons, contain, besides the books
issued during the author's lifetime, the post-
humous St. Jves and Weir of Hermiston, un-
finished as it was. ''The Thistle Edition" by
the same publishers contains also The Vailima
Letters (two volumes) and The Letters of
Robert Louis Stevenson (two volumes), both
edited by Sidney Colvin, and also The Life of
Robert Louis Stevenson by Graham Balfour.
. Both the Letters and the Life are also pub-
lished separately. "'The South Seas Edition"
was published by Scribner's in 1925, in thirty-
two volumes.
Besides Balfour's biography, there are nu-
merous others that may be found helpful. Among
these may be mentioned the following: Robert
Louis Stevenson by T. Cope Cornford (Dodd,
Mead and Company); Robert Louis Steven-
son (Famous Scots Series) by Margaret M.
Black (Charles Scribner's Sons); Robert Louis
Stevenson: A Life in Criticism by H. Bellyse
Baildon (A. Wessels & Co.); Life of Robert
INTRODUCTION XXX1X
Louis Stevenson by Rosaline Masson (W. &
R. Chambers); R. L. Stevenson; A Critical
Study by Arthur Frank Swinnerton (George H.
Doran Company); Robert Louis Stevenson;
Some Personal Recollections by the Late Lord
Guthrie (W. Green & Son); Robert Louis
Stevenson; A Critical Biography by John A.
Steuart (Little, Brown, and Company); The
True Stevenson by George S. Hellman (Little,
Brown, and Company); and Robert Louis
Stevenson by G. K. Chesterton (Dodd, Mead
and Co.)
Studies on Stevenson that are to be com-
mended are: Robert Louis Stevenson by Walter
Raleigh (Edward Arnold); Stevenson's Atti-
tude to Life by John Franklin Genung (Thomas
Y. Crowell and Company); and "Stevenson's
Philosophy of Life" in Philosophy and Life by
J. H. Muirhead (Macmillan & Company, Lim-
ited). In this connection may be studied with
profit The Art of Fiction by Walter Besant and
Henry James (Cupples, Upham and Com-
pany): the two papers that called from
Stevenson "A Humble Remonstance" (Memo-
ries and Portraits), which, together with "A
Gossip on Romance" (same volume), contains
his theory of this art.
' The magazine articles on Stevenson are too
numerous to be listed here. Many such are ac-
cessible in the files of such periodicals as The
x] INTRODUCTION
Ceniury Magazine, The North American Re-
view, McClure's Magazine, Scribner's Maga-
zine, and The Atlantic Monthly. Students who
are sufficiently interested in the man and his
work may find a great amount of good material
by consulting an index to periodical literature.
TREASURE ISLAND
TO THE HESITATING PURCHASER
If sailor tales to sailor tunes,
Storm and adventure, heat and cold,
If schooners, islands, and maroons®
And Buccaneers® and buried Gold,
And all the old romance, retold,
Exactly in the ancient way,
Can please, as me they pleased of old,
The wiser youngsters of to-day:
-So be it, and fall on! If not,
If studious youth no longer crave,
His ancient appetites forgot,
Kingston, or Ballantyne° the brave,
Or Cooper® of the wood and wave;
So be it, also! And may I
And all my pirates share the grave
Where these and their creations lie!
PARTS T
THE OLD BUCCANEER
AG= S
a a a
Na [ AScale fx English Miles
PE:
OFF | W ,
f pny 7;
() 15 '
ACove /
14 T jj
a /
ite Roe! t
Delle vetorIsland
NOX / ee
VO) eae
were lable. ole DM? Y [SonerMatt>, (e Wihurd
Coe HAS Monee SAE
Lif itAS CLG in
TREASURE ISLAND
CHAPTER I
THE OLD SEA Doc AT THE "ADMIRAL BENBOW"
SQUIRE TRELAWNEY, Dr. Livesey, and the
rest of these gentlemen having asked me to
write down the whole particulars about Treas-
ure Island, from the beginning to the end, keep-
ing nothing back but the bearings of the island,
and that only because there is still treasure not
yet lifted, I take up my pen in the year of grace
17-,° and go back to the time when my father
kept the "Admiral Benbow" inn, and the brown
old seaman, with the sabre cut, first took up
his lodging under our roof.
I remember him as if it were yesterday, as
he came plodding to the inn door, his sea-chest
following behind him in a hand-barrow; a tall,
strong, heavy, nut-brown man°; his tarry pig-
tail falling over the shoulders of his soiled blue
coat; his hands ragged and scarred, with black,
broken nails; and the sabre cut across one
cheek, a dirty, livid white. I remember him
looking round the cove and whistling to him-
self as he did so, and then breaking out in that
0 ee
Hh o
6 TREASURE ISLAND
old sea-song that he sang so often after-
wards:-
"Fifteen men on the dead man's chest-
Yo-ho-ho, and a bottle of rum!" °
5 in the high, old tottering voice that seemed to
have been tuned and broken at the capstan
bars.° Then he rapped on the door with a bit
of stick like a handspike that he carried, and
when my father appeared, called roughly for
10a glass of rum. This, when it was brought to
him, he drank slowly, like a connoisseur,° lin-
gering on the taste, and still looking about him
at the cliffs and up at our signboard.
"This is a handy cove," says he, at length;
15 'and a pleasant sittyated grog-shop. Much
company, mate?"
My father told him no, very little company,
the more was the pity.
"Well, then," said he, "this is the berth for
20 me. Here you, matey," he cried to the man who
trundled the barrow; "bring up alongside and
help up my chest. I'll stay here a bit," he con-
tinued. "I'm a plain man; rum and bacon and
eggs is what I want, and that head up there
25 for to watch ships off. What you mought call
me? You, mought call me captain. Oh, I see
what you're at-there;" and he threw down
three or four gold pieces on the threshold.
"You can tell me when I've worked through
30 that," says he, looking as fierce as a commander.
THE OLp SEA Doc 7
And, indeed, bad as his clothes were, and
coarsely as he spoke, he had none of the ap-
pearance of a man who sailed before the
mast°; but seemed like a mate or skipper,° ac-
customed to be obeyed or to strike. The man
who came with the barrow told us the mail®
had set him down the morning before at the
"Royal George;" that he had inquired what
inns there were along the coast, and hearing
ours well spoken of, I suppose, and described
as lonely, had chosen it from the others for his
place of residence. And that was all we could
learn of our guest.
He was a very silent man by custom. All
day he hung round the cove, or upon the cliffs,
with a brass telescope; all evening he sat in a
corner of the parlour next the fire, and drank
rum and water very strong. Mostly he would
not speak when spoken to; only look up sud-
den and fierce and blow through his nose like
a fog-horn; and we and the people who came
about our house soon learned to let him be.
Every day, when he came back from his stroll,
sn
rs 0
he would ask if any seafaring men had gone by »
along the road? At first we thought it was the
want of company of his own kind that made
him ask this question, but at last we began to
see he was desirous to avoid them. When a sea-
man put up at the 'Admiral Benbow" (as now
and then some did, making by the coast road 30
oO
1 f-)
AY
8 TREASURE ISLAND
for Bristol),° he would look in at him through
the curtained door before he entered the par-
lour; and he was always sure to be as silent
as a mouse when any such was present. For
me, at least, there was no secret about the mat-
ter; for I was, in a way, a sharer in his alarms.
He had taken me aside one day, and promised
me a silver fourpenny on the first of every
month if I would only keep my "weather-eye
open for a seafaring man with one leg," and
let him know the moment he appeared.- Often
enough, when the first of the month came
round, and I applied to him for my wage, he
would only blow through his nose at me, and
stare me down; but before the week was out
he was sure to think better of it, bring me my
fourpenny piece, and repeat his orders to look
out for "the seafaring man with one leg."
How that personage haunted my dreams, I
need scarcely tell you. On stormy nights, when
the wind shook the four corners of the house,
and the surf roared along the cove and up the
cliffs, I would see him in a thousand forms,
and with a thousand diabolical° expressions.
Now the leg would be cut off at the knee, now
at the hip; now he was a monstrous kind of
a creature who had never had but the one leg,
and that in the middle of his body. To see him
leap and run and pursue me over hedge and
ditch was the worst of nightmares. And alto-
THE OLp SEA Doc 9
getner I paid pretty dear for my monthly
fourpenny piece, in the shape of these abom-
inable fancies.
But though I was so terrified by the idea of
the seafaring man with one leg, I was far less
afraid of the captain himself than anybody
else who knew him. There were nights when
he took a deal more rum and water than his
head would carry; and then he would some-
times sit and sing his wicked, old, wild sea-
songs, minding nobody; but sometimes he
would call for glasses round, and force all the
trembling company to listen to his stories or
bear a chorus to his singing. Often I have
heard the house shaking with ''Yo-ho-ho, and
a bottle of rum;" all the neighbours joining in
for dear life, with the fear of death upon them,
and each singing louder than the other, to avoid
remark. For in these fits he was the most over-
riding companion ever known; he would slap
his hand on the table for silence all round; he
would fly up in a passion of anger at a question,
or sometimes because none was put, and so he
judged the company was not following his story.
Nor would he allow anyone to leave the inn till
he had drunk himself sleepy and reeled off to
bed.
His stories were what frightened people worst
of all. Dreadful stories they were; about hang-
ing, and walking the plank, and storms at sea,
on
IO TREASURE ISLAND
and the Dry Tortugas,° and wild deeds and
places on the Spanish Main.° By his own ac-
count he must have lived his life among some
of the wickedest men that God ever allowed
upon the sea; and the language in which he
told these stories shocked our plain country
people almost as much as the crimes that he
described. My father was always saying the inn
would be ruined, for people would soon cease
10 coming there to be tyrannised over and put
down, and sent shivering to their beds; but I
really believe his presence did us good. People
were frightened at the time, but on looking
back they rather liked it; it was a fine excite-
15 ment in a quiet country life; and there was
even a party of the younger men who pretended
to admire him, calling him a "true sea dog,"
and a "real old salt," and such like names, and
saying there was the sort of man that made
20 England terrible at sea.°
In one way, indeed, he bade fair to ruin us;
for he kept on staying week after week, and at
last month after month, so that all the money
had been long exhausted, and still my father
25 never plucked up the heart to insist on having
more. If ever he mentioned it, the captain blew
through his nose so loudly, that you might say
he roared, and stared my poor father out of the
room. I have seen him wringing his hands after
30 such a rebuff, and I am sure the annoyance and
On
THE Otp Sea Doc II
the terror he lived in must have greatly has-
tened his early and unhappy death.
All the time he lived with us the captain
made no change whatever in his dress but to
buy some stockings from a hawker.° One of
the cocks of his hat having fallen down, he let
it hang from that day forth, though it was a
great annoyance when it blew. I remember the
appearance of his coat, which he patched him-
self up-stairs in his room, and which, before the
end, was nothing but patches. He never wrote
or received a letter, and he never spoke with
any but the neighbours, and with these, for the
most part, only when drunk on rum. The great
sea-chest none of us had ever seen open.
He was only once crossed, and that was
towards the end, when my poor father was far
gone in a decline that took him off. Dr. Livesey
came late one afternoon to see the patient, took
a bit of dinner from my mother, and went into
the parlour to smoke a pipe until his horse
should come down from the hamlet, for we had
no stabling at the old "Benbow." I followed
him in, and I remember observing the contrast
the neat, bright doctor, with his powder as
white as snow, and his bright, black eyes and
pleasant manners, made with the coltish coun-
try folk, and above all, with that filthy, heavy,
bleared scarecrow of a pirate of ours, sitting
_ far gone in rum, with his arms on the table.
ot
i)
ol
OV
12 TREASURE ISLAND
Suddenly he-the captain, that is-began to
pipe up his eternal song: -
"Fifteen men on the dead man's chest-
Yo-ho-ho, and a bottle of rum!
Drink and the devil had done for the rest-
Yo-ho-ho, and a bottle of rum!"
At first I had supposed "the dead man's chest"
to be that identical big box of his up-stairs in
the front room, and the thought had been
mingled in my nightmares with that of the one-
legged seafaring man. But by this time we had
all long ceased to pay any particular notice to
the song; it was new, that night, to nobody but
Dr. Livesey, and on him I observed it did not
produce an agreeable effect, for he looked up
for a moment quite angrily before he went on
with his talk to old Taylor, the gardener, on a
new cure for the rheumatics. In the meantime,
the captain gradually brightened up at his own
music, and at last flapped his hand upon the
table before him in a way we all knew to mean
-silence. The voices stopped at once, all but
Dr. Livesey's; he went on as before, speaking
clear and kind, and drawing briskly at his pipe
between every word or two. The captain glared
at him for a while, flapped his hand again,
glared still harder, and at last broke out with
a villainous, low oath: "Silence, there, between
decks!"
THE Op SEA Doc 12
"Were you addressing me, sir?' says the doc-
tor; and when the ruffian had told him, with
another oath, that this was so, "I have only one
thing to say to you, sir," replies the doctor,
"that if you keep on drinking rum, the world
will soon be quit of a very dirty scoundrel!"
The old fellow's fury was awful. He sprang
to his feet, drew and opened a sailor's clasp-
knife, and, balancing it open on the palm of
his hand, threatened to pin the doctor to the
wall.
The doctor never so much as moved. He
spoke to him, as before, over his shoulder, and
in the same tone of voice; rather high, so that
all in the room might hear, but perfectly calm
and steady:-
"Tf you do not put that knife this instant in
your pocket, I promise, upon my honour, you
shall hang at next assizes."°
Then followed a battle of looks between
them; but the captain soon knuckled under,
put up his weapon, and resumed his seat,
grumbling like a beaten dog.
"And now, sir," continued the doctor, "'since
I now know there's such a fellow in my district,
you may count I'll have an eye upon you day
and night. I'm not a doctor only; I'm a magis-
trate; and if I catch a breath of complaint
against you, if it's only for a piece of incivility
like to-night's, [ll take effectual means to have
14 TREASURE ISLAND
you hunted down and routed out of this. Let
that suffice."
Soon after Dr. Livesey's horse came to the
door, and he rode away; but the captain held
5 his peace that evening, and for many evenings
to come.
CHAPTER II
BLACK Doc APPEARS AND DISAPPEARS
Ir was not very long after this that there
occurred the first of the mysterious events that
rid us at last of the captain, though not, as you
will see, of his affairs. It was a bitter cold
winter, with long, hard frosts and heavy gales;
and it was plain from the first that my poor
father was little likely to see the spring. He
sank daily, and my mother and I had all the
inn upon our hands; and were kept busy
enough, without paying much regard to our
unpleasant guest.
It was one January morning, very early-a
pinching, frosty morning-the cove all grey
with hoar-frost, the ripple lapping softly on the
stones, the sun still low and only touching the
hilltops and shining far to seaward. The cap-
tain had risen earlier than usual, and set out
down the beach, his cutlass° swinging under
the broad skirts of the old blue coat, his brass
telescope under his arm, his hat tilted back
upon his head. I remember his breath hanging
like smoke in his wake as he strode off, and the
last sound I heard of him, as he turned the big
vA
ro 0
oO
1 i=)
if on
16 TREASURE ISLAND
rock, was a loud snort of indignation, as though
his mind was still running upon Dr. Livesey.
Well, mother was up-stairs with father; and
I was laying the breakfast-table against the
captain's return, when the parlour door opened,
and a man stepped in on whom [I had never set
my eyes before. He was a pale, tallowy crea-
ture, wanting two fingers of the left hand; and,
though he wore a cutlass, he did not look much
like a fighter. I had always my eye open for
seafaring men, with one leg or two, and I re-
member this one puzzled me. He was not
sailorly, and yet he had a smack of the sea
about him too.
I asked him what was for his service, and
he said he would take rum; but as I was going
out of the room to fetch it he sat down upon a
table and motioned me to draw near. I paused
where I was with my napkin in my hand.
"Come here, sonny," says he. '(Come nearer
here." I took a step nearer.
"Ts this here table for my mate Bill?" he
asked, with a kind of leer.
I told him I did not know his mate Bill; and
this was for a person who stayed in our house,
whom we called the captain.
"Well," said he, "my mate Bill would be
called the captain, as like as not. He has a cut
on one cheek, and a mighty pleasant way with
him, particularly in drink, has my mate Bill.
Brack Doc APPEARS AND DISAPPEARS 17
We'll put it, for argument like, that your cap-
tain has a cut on one cheek-and we'll put it,
if you like, that that cheek's the right one. Ah,
well! I told you. Now, is my mate Bill in this
here house?"
I told him he was out walking.
"Which way, sonny? Which way is he gone?"
And when I had pointed out the rock and
told him how the captain was likely to return,
and how soon, and answered a few other ques-
tions, "Ah," said he, "this'll be as good as drink
to my mate Bill."
The expression of his face as he said these
words was not at all pleasant, and I had my
own reasons for thinking that the stranger was
mistaken, even supposing he meant what he
said. But it was no affair of mine, I thought;
and, besides, it was difficult to know what to
do. The stranger kept hanging about just inside
the inn door, peering round the corner like a
cat waiting for a mouse. Once I stepped out
myself into the road, but he immediately called
me back, and, as I did not obey quick enough
for his fancy, a most horrible change came over
his tallowy face, and he ordered me in, with
an oath that made me jump. As soon as I was
back again he returned to his former manner,
half fawning, half sneering, patted me on the
shoulder, told me I was a good boy, and he had
taken quite a fancy to me. "I have a son of
hp 0
Oo
H o
2 c-)
18 TREASURE ISLAND
my own," said he, '"'as like you as two blocks,
and he's all the pride of my 'art. But the great
thing for boys is discipline, sonny-discipline.
Now, if you had sailed along of Bill, you
wouldn't have stood there to be spoke to twice
-not you. That was never Bill's way, nor the
way of sich as sailed with him. And here, sure
enough, is my mate Bill, with a spyglass under
his arm, bless his old 'art, to be sure. You and
me'll just go back into the parlour, sonny, and
get behind the door, and we'll give Bill a little
surprise-bless his 'art, I say again."
So saying, the stranger backed along with
me into the parlour, and put me behind him in
the corner, so that we were both hidden by the
open door. I was very uneasy and alarmed, as
you may fancy, and it rather added to my fears
to observe that the stranger was certainly
frightened himself. He cleared the hilt of his
cutlass and loosened the blade in the sheath;
and all the time we were waiting there he kept
swallowing as if he felt what we used to call
a lump in the throat.
At last in strode the captain, slammed the
door behind him, without looking to the right
or left, and marched straight across the room
to where his breakfast awaited him.
"Bill," said the stranger, in a voice that I
thought he had tried to make bold and big.
The captain spun round on his heel and
Brack Doc APPEARS AND DISAPPEARS 19
fronted us; all the brown had gone out of his
face, and even his nose was blue; he had the
look of a man who sees a ghost, or the evil one,
or something worse, if anything can be; and,
upon my word, I felt sorry to see him, all in a
moment, turn so old and sick.
"Come, Bill, you know me; you know an old
shipmate, Bill, surely," said the stranger.
The captain made a sort of gasp.
"Black Dog!" said he.
"And who else?" returned the other, getting
more at his ease. "Black Dog as ever was, come
for to see his old shipmate Billy, at the 'Admiral
Benbow' inn. Ah, Bill, Bill, we have seen a sight
of times, us 'two, since I lost them two talons,"
holding up his mutilated hand.
"Now, look here," said the captain; ''you've
run me down; here I am; well, then, speak up:
what is it?"
"That's you, Bill,' returned Black Dog,
"youre in the right of it, Billy. I'll have a glass
oi rum from this dear child here, as I've took
such a liking to; and we'll sit down, if you
please, and talk square, like old shipmates."
When I returned with the rum, they were
already seated on either side of the captain's
breakfast-table-Black Dog next to the door,
and sitting sideways, so as to have one eye on
his old shipmate, and one, as I thought, on his
retreat.
ol
or
2 So
20 TREASURE ISLAND
He bade me go, and leave the door wide
open. "None of your keyholes for me, sonny,"
he said; and I left them together, and retired
into the bar.
For a long time, though I certainly did my
best to listen, I could hear nothing but a low
gabbling; but at last the voices began to grow
higher, and I could pick up a word or two,
mostly oaths, from the captain.
"No, no, no, no; and an end of it!" he cried
once. And again, "If it comes to swinging,
swing all, say I.'"°
Then all of a sudden there was a tremendous
explosion of oaths and other noises-the chair
and table went over in a lump, a clash of steel
followed, and then a cry of pain, and the next
instant I saw Black Dog in full flight, and the
captain hotly pursuing, both with drawn cut-
lasses, and the former streaming blood from the
left shoulder. Just at the door, the captain
aimed at the fugitive one last tremendous cut,
which would certainly have split him to the
chine® had it not been intercepted by our big
signboard of Admiral Benbow. You may see
the notch on the lower side of the frame to this
day.
That blow was the last of the battle. Once
out upon the road, Black Dog, in spite of his
wound, showed a wonderful clean pair of heels,
and disappeared over the edge of the hill in half
Biack Doc APPEARS AND DISAPPEARS 21
a minute. The captain, for his part, stood star-
ing at the signboard like a bewildered man.
Then he passed his hand over his eyes several
times, and at last turned back into the house.
"Jim," says he, "rum;" and as he spoke, he
reeled a little, and caught himself with one hand
against the wall.
"Are you hurt?" cried I.
"Rum," he repeated. "I must get away from
here. Rum! rum!"
I ran to fetch it; but I was quite unsteadied
by all that had fallen out, and I broke one glass
and fouled the tap, and while I was still getting
in my own way, I heard a loud fall in the
parlour, and, running in, beheld the captain
lying full length upon the floor. At the same
instant my mother, alarmed by the cries and
fighting, came running down-stairs to help me.
Between us we raised his head. He was breath-
ing very loud and hard; but his eyes were
closed, and his face a horrible colour.
"Dear, deary me," cried my mother, "what
a disgrace upon the house! And your poor
father sick!"
In the meantime, we had no idea what to do
to help the captain, nor any other thought but
that he had got his death-hurt in the scuffle with
the stranger. I got the rum, to be sure, and
tried to put it down his throat; but his teeth
were tightly shut, and his jaws as strong as
ou
Or
Or
22 TREASURE ISLAND
iron. It was a happy relief for us when the
door opened and Dr. Livesey came in, on his
visit to my father.
"Oh, doctor," we cried, "what shall we do?
Where is he wounded?"
"Wounded? A fiddle-stick's end!" said the
doctor. "No more wounded than you or I. The
man has had a stroke, as I warned him. Now,
Mrs. Hawkins, just you run up-stairs to your
husband, and tell him, if possible, nothing
about it. For my part, I must do my best to
save this fellow's trebly worthless life; and Jim
here will get me a basin."
When I got back with the basin, the doctor
had already ripped up the captain's sleeve, and
exposed his great sinewy arm. It was tattooed
in several places. "Here's luck," "A fair wind,"
and "Billy Bones his fancy," were very neatly
and clearly executed on the forearm; and up
near the shoulder there was a sketch of a gal-
lows and a man hanging from it-done, as I
thought, with great spirit.
"Prophetic," said the doctor, touching this
picture with his finger. "And now, Master Billy
Bones, if that be your name, we'll have a look
at the colour of your blood. Jim," he said, "'are
you afraid of blood?"
"No, sir," said I.
"Well, then," said he, "you hold the basin;"
Brack Doc AppEARS AND DISAPPEARS 23
and with that he took his lancet and opened a
vein.
A great deal of blood was taken before the
captain opened his eyes and looked mistily
about him. First he recognized the doctor with
an unmistakable frown; then his glance fell
upon me, and he looked relieved. But suddenly
his colour changed, and he tried to raise him-
self, crying: -
"Where's Black Dog?"
"There is no Black Dog here," said the doc-
tor, "except what you have on your own back.
You have been drinking rum; you have had a
stroke, precisely as I told you; and I have just,
very much against my own will, dragged you
headforemost out of the grave. Now, Mr.
Bones mM
"That's not my name," he interrupted.
"Much I care," returned the doctor. "It's the
name of a buccaneer of my acquaintance; and
I call you by it for the sake of shortness, and
what I have to say to you is this: one glass of
rum won't kill you, but if you take one you'll
take another and another, and I stake my wig
if you don't break off short, you'll die-do you
understand that?- die, and go to your own
place, like the man in the Bible. Come, now,
make an effort. I'll help you to your bed for
once."
or
24 TREASURE ISLAND
Between us, with much trouble, we managed
to hoist him up-stairs, and laid him on his bed,
where his head fell back on the pillow, as if
he were almost fainting.
5 "Now, mind you," said the doctor, "I clear
my conscience-the name of rum for you is
death."
And with that he went off to see my father,
taking me with him by the arm.
10 "This is nothing," he said, as soon as he had
closed the door. "I have drawn blood enough to
keep him quiet awhile; he should lie for a week
where he is-that is the best thing for him and
you; but another stroke would settle him."
CHAPTER III
Tuer BLAcK SPOT
AxsoutT noon I stopped at the captain's door
with some cooling drinks and medicines. He
was lying very much as we had left him, only
a little higher, and he seemed both weak and
excited.
"Jim," he said, "you're the only one here
that's worth anything; and you know I've been
always good to you. Never a month but I've
given you a silver fourpenny for yourself. And
now you see, mate, I'm pretty low, and de-
serted by all; and Jim, you'll bring me one
noggin® of rum, now, won't you, matey?"
"The doctor-" I began.
But he broke in cursing the doctor, in a
feeble voice, but heartily. 'Doctors is all
swabs," he said; "and that doctor there, why,
what do he know about seafaring men? I been
in places hot as pitch, and mates dropping
round with Yellow Jack,° and the blessed land
a-heaving like the sea with earthquakes-what
do the doctor know of lands like that?-and I
lived on rum, I tell you. It's been meat and
drink, and man and wife, to me; and if I'm not
ot
Or
1 OV
oO 2
26 TREASURE ISLAND
to have my rum now I'm a poor old hulk on a
lee shore, my blood'll be on you, Jim, and that
Doctor swab;" and he ran on again for a while
with curses. 'Look, Jim, how my fingers
fidges,°" he continued, in the pleading tone. "I
can't keep 'em still, not I. I haven't had a drop
this blessed day. That doctor's a fool, I tell
you. If I don't have a drain o' rum, Jim, Til
have the horrors; I seen some on 'em already.
I seen old Flint in the corner there, behind you;
as plain as print, I seen him; and if I get the
horrors, ''m a man that has lived rough, and
T'll raise Cain. Your doctor hisself said one
glass wouldn't hurt me. Ill give you a golden
guinea for a noggin, Jim."
He was growing more and more excited, and
this alarmed me for my father, who was very
low that day, and needed quiet; besides, I was
reassured by the doctor's words, now quoted to
me, and rather offended by the offer of a bribe.
"T want none of your money," said I, "but
what you owe my father. Ill get you one glass,
and no more."
When I brought it to him he seized it
greedily, and drank it out.
"Ay, ay," said he, "that's some better, sure
enough. And now, matey, did that doctor say
how long I was to lie here in this old berth?"
"A week at least," said I.
"Thunder!" he cried. "A week! I can't do
THE Brack Spot 2
that: they'd have the black spot on me by then.
The lubbers° is going about to get the wind of
me this blessed moment; lubbers as couldn't
keep what they got, and want to nail what is
another's. Is that seamanly behaviour, now, I
want to know? But I'm a saving soul. I never
wasted good money of mine, nor lost it neither;
and [ll trick 'em again. I'm not afraid on 'em.
I'll shake out another reef, matey, and daddle
7em again."
As he was thus speaking, he had risen from
bed with great difficulty, holding to my shoulder
with a grip that almost made me cry out, and
moving his legs like so much dead weight. His
words, spirited as they were in meaning, con-
trasted sadly with the weakness of the voice in
which they were uttered. He paused when he
had got into a sitting position on the edge.
"The doctor's done me," he murmured. "My
ears is singing. Lay me back."
Before I could do much to help him he had
fallen back again to his former place, where he
lay for a while silent.
"Jim," he said, at length, "you saw that sea-
faring man today?"
"Black Dog?" I asked.
"Ah! Black Dog," says he. "He's a bad 'un;
but there's worse that put him on. Now, if I
can't get away nohow, and they tip me the
black spot, mind you, it's my old sea-chest
ot
co 0
28 TREASURE ISLAND
they're after; you get on a horse-you can,
can't you? Well, then, you get on a horse, and
go to-well, yes, I will!-to that eternal Doctor
swab, and tell him to pipe all hands-magis-
trates and sich-and he'll lay 'em aboard® at
the 'Admiral Benbow'-all old Flint's crew,
man and boy, all on 'em that's left. I was first
mate, I was, old Flint's first mate, and I'm the
on'y one as knows the place. He gave it me at
Savannah, when he lay a-dying, like as if I was
to now, you see. But you won't peach unless
they get the black spot on me, or unless you see
that Black Dog again, or a seafaring man with
one leg, Jim-him above all."
15 "But what is the black spot, captain?" I
asked.
"That's a summons, mate. I'll tell you if they
get that. But you keep your weather-eye open,
Jim, and [ll share with you equals, upon my
20 honour."
He wandered a little longer, his voice grow-
ing weaker; but soon after I had given him his
medicine, which he took like a child, with the
remark, "If ever a seaman wanted drugs, it's
me," he fell at last into a heavy, swoon-like
sleep, in which I left him. What I should have
done had all gone well I do not know. Probably
I should have told the whole story to the doc-
tor; for I was in mortal fear lest the captain
30 Should repent of his confessions and make an
oO
il i)
2 ol
THE BLAcKk Spot 29
end of me. But as things fell out, my poor
father died quite suddenly that evening, which
put all other matters on one side. Our natural
distress, the visits of the neighbours, the ar-
ranging of the funeral, and all the work of the
inn to be carried on in the meanwhile, kept me
so busy that I had scarcely time to think of the
captain, far less to be afraid of him.
He got down-stairs next morning, to be sure,
and had his meals as usual, though he ate little,
and had more, I am afraid, than his usual
supply of rum, for he helped himself out of the
bar, scowling and blowing through his nose, and
no one dared to cross him. On the night before
the funeral he was as drunk as ever; and it was
shocking, in that house of mourning, to hear
him singing away at his ugly old sea-song; but,
weak as he was, we were all in the fear of death
for him, and the doctor was suddenly taken up
with a case many miles away, and was never
near the house after my father's death. I have
said the captain was weak; and indeed he
seemed rather to grow weaker than regain his
strength. He clambered up and downstairs, and
went from the parlour to the bar and back
again, and sometimes put his nose out of doors
to smell the sea, holding on to the walls as he
went for support, and breathing hard and fast
like a man oni a steep mountain. He never par-
ticularly addressed me, and it is my belief he
30 TREASURE ISLAND
had as good as forgotten his confidences; but
his temper was more flighty, and, allowing for
his bodily weakness, more violent than ever.
He had an alarming way now when he was
drunk of drawing his cutlass and laying it bare
before him on the table. But, with all that, he
minded people less, and seemed shut up in his
own thoughts and rather wandering. Once, for
instance, to our extreme wonder, he piped up
10 to a different air, a kind of country love-song,
that he must have learned in his youth before:
he had begun to follow the sea.
So things passed until, the day after the
funeral, and about three o'clock of a bitter,
15 foggy, frosty afternoon, I was standing at the
door for a moment, full of sad thoughts about
my father, when I saw someone drawing slowly
near along the road. He was plainly blind, for
he tapped before him with a stick, and wore a
20 great green shade over his eyes and nose; and
he was hunched, as if with age or weakness,
and wore a huge old tattered sea-cloak with a
hood, that made him appear positively de-
formed. I never saw in my life a more dreadful
looking figure. He stopped a little from the inn,
and, raising his voice in an odd sing-song,
addressed the air in front of him:-
"Will any kind friend inform a poor blind
man,° who has lost the precious sight of his
30 eyes in the gracious defence of his native coun-
oO
2 Oo
Tue BLack SPOT 31
try, England, and God bless King George! -
where or in what part of this country he may
now be?"
"You are at the 'Admiral Benbow,' Black
Hill Cove, my good man," said I.
"T hear a voice," said he- "a young voice.
Will you give me your hand, my kind young
friend, and lead me in?"
I held out my hand, and the horrible, soft-
spoken, eyeless creature gripped it in a moment
like a vice. I was so much startled that I strug-
gled to withdraw; but the blind man pulled me
close up to him with a single action of his arm.
"Now, boy," he said, "take me in to the cap-
tain."
"Sir," said I, "upon my word I dare not."
"Oh," he sneered, "that's it! Take me in
straight, or Pll break your arm."
And he gave it, as he spoke, a wrench that
made me cry out.
"Sir," said I, "it is for yourself I mean. The
captain is not what he used to be. He sits with
a drawn cutlass. Another gentleman
"Come, now, march," interrupted he; and I
never heard a voice so cruel, and cold, and
ugly as that blind man's. It cowed me more
than the pain; and I began to obey him at once,
walking straight in at the door and towards the
parlour, where our sick old buccaneer was sit-
ting, dazed with rum. The blind man clung
Be TREASURE ISLAND
close to me, holding me in one iron fist, and
leaning almost more of his weight on me than
I could carry. "Lead me straight up to him, and
when I'm in view, cry out, 'Here's a friend for
you, Bill.' If you don't I'll do this;" and with
that he gave me a twitch that I thought would
have made me faint. Between this and that, I
was so utterly terrified of the blind beggar that
I forgot my terror of the captain, and as I
10 opened the parlour door, cried out the words he
had ordered in a trembling voice.
The poor captain raised his eyes, and at one
look the rum went out of him, and left him
staring sober. The expression of his face was
15 not so much of terror as of mortal sickness. He
made a movement to rise, but I do not believe
he had enough force left in his body.
"Now, Bill, sit where you are," said the
beggar. "If I can't see, I can hear a finger
stirring. Business is business. Hold out your
left hand. Boy, take his left hand by the wrist,
and bring it near to my right."
We both obeyed him to the letter, and I saw
him pass something from the hollow of the
hand that held his stick into the palm of the
captain's, which closed upon it instantly.
"And now that's done," said the blind man;
and at the words he suddenly left hold of me,
and, with incredible accuracy and nimbleness,
30 skipped out of the parlour and into the road,
or
2 ot
Warwick GOBLE
Ju Leapinc Pew to Bitty Bones
THE BLAcK Spot 2
where, as I still stood motionless, I could hear
his stick go tap-tap-tapping into the distance.
_ It was some time before either I or the cap-
tain seemed to gather our senses; but at length,
and about at the same moment, I released his
wrist, which I was still holding, and he drew in
his hand and looked sharply into the palm.
"Ten o'clock!" he cried. 'Six hours. We'll do
them yet;"' and he sprang to his feet.
Even as he did so, he reeled, put his hand to
his throat, stood swaying for a moment, and
then, with a peculiar sound, fell from his whole
height face foremost to the floor.
I ran to him at once, calling to my mother.
But haste was all in vain. The captain had been
struck dead by thundering apoplexy. It is a
curious thing to understand, for I had certainly
never liked the man, though of late I had begun
to pity him, but as soon as I saw that he was
dead, I burst into a flood of tears. It was the
second death I had known, and the sorrow of
the first was still fresh in my heart,
or
oO
CHAPTER IV
THE SEA-CHEST
I Lost no time, of course, in telling my
mother all that I knew, and perhaps should have
told her long before, and we saw ourselves at
once in a difficult and dangerous position. Some
of the man's money-if he had any-was cer-
tainly due to us; but it was not likely that our
captain's shipmates, above all the two speci-
mens seen by me, Black Dog and the blind
beggar, would be inclined to give up their booty
in payment of the dead man's debts. The cap-
tain's order to mount at once and ride for
Dr. Livesey would have left my mother alone
and unprotected, which was not to be thought
of. Indeed, it seemed impossible for either of
us to remain much longer in the house: the fall
of coals in the kitchen grate, the very ticking of
the clock, filled us with alarms. The neighbour-
hood, to our ears, seemed haunted by approach-
ing footsteps; and what between the dead body
of the captain on the parlour floor, and the
thought of that detestable blind beggar hover-
ing near at hand, and ready to return, there
were moments when, as the saying goes, I
THE SEa-CHEST oun
jumped in my skin for terror. Something must
speedily be resolved upon; and it occurred to
us at last to go forth together and seek help in
the neighbouring hamlet. No sooner said than
done. Bare-headed as we were, we ran out at
once in the gathering evening and the frosty
fog.
The hamlet lay not many hundred yards
away, though out of view, on the other side of
the next cove; and what greatly encouraged
me, it was in an opposite direction from that
whence the blind man had made his appear-
ance, and whither he had presumably returned.
We were not many minutes on the road, though
we sometimes stopped to lay hold of each other
and hearken. But there was no unusual sound
-nothing but the low wash of the ripple and
the croaking of the inmates of the wood.°
It was already candle-light when we reached
the hamlet, and I shall never forget how much
I was cheered to see the yellow shine in doors
and windows; but that, as it proved, was the
best of the help we were likely to get in that
quarter. For-you would have thought men
would have been ashamed of themselves-no
soul would consent to return with us to the
"Admiral Benbow." The more we told of our
troubles, the more-man, woman, and child-
they clung to the shelter of their houses. The
name of Captain Flint, though it was strange to
oO
o
ol
38 TREASURE ISLAND
me, was well enough known to some there, and
carried a great weight of terror. Some of the
men who had been to field-work on the far side
of the "Admiral Benbow" remembered, besides,
to have seen several strangers on the road, and,
taking them to be smugglers, to have bolted
away; and one at least had seen a little lugger®
in what we called Kitt's Hole. For that matter,
anyone who was a comrade of the captain's was
enough to frighten them to death. And the short
and the long of the matter was, that while we
could get several who were willing enough to
ride to Dr. Livesey's, which lay in another
direction, not one would help us to defend the
inn,
They say cowardice is infectious; but then
argument is, on the other hand, a great em-
boldener; and so when each had said his say,
my mother made them a speech. She would not,
she declared, lose money that belonged to her
fatherless boy; "if none of the rest of you
dare," she said, "Jim and I dare. Back we will
go, the way we came, and small thanks to you
vig, hulking, chicken-hearted men. We'll have
that chest open, if we die for it. And I'll thank
you for that bag, Mrs. Crossley, to bring back
our lawful money in."
Of course, I said I would go with my mother;
and of course they all cried out at our fool-
THE SEA-CHEST 39
hardiness; but even then not a man would go
along with us. All they would do was to give
me a loaded pistol, lest we were attacked; and
to promise to have horses ready saddled, in case
we were pursued on our return; while one lad
was to ride forward to the doctor's in search of
armed assistance.
My heart was beating finely when we two
set forth in the cold night upon this dangerous
venture. A full moon was beginning to rise and
peered redly through the upper edges of the
fog, and this increased our haste, for it was
plain, before we came forth again, that all
would be as bright as day, and our departure
exposed to the eyes of any watchers. We slipped
along the hedges, noiseless and swift, nor did
we see or hear anything to increase our terrors,
till, to our relief, the door of the '"'Admiral Ben-
bow" had closed behind us.
I slipped the bolt at once, and we stood and 2
panted for a moment in the dark, alone in the
house with the dead captain's body. Then my
mother got a candle in the bar, and, holding
each other's hands, we advanced into the par-
lour. He lay as we had left him, on his back,
with his eyes open, and one arm stretched out.
"Draw down the blind, Jim," whispered my
mother; 'they might come and watch outside.
And now," said she, when I had done so, "we
eal
ol
2 So
40 TREASURE ISLAND
have to get the key off that; and who's to touch
it, I should like to know!" and she gave a kind
of sob as she said the words.
I went down on my knees at once. On the
floor close to his hand there was a little round
of paper, blackened on the one side. I could not
doubt that this was the black spot; and taking
it up, I found written on the other side, in a
very good, clear hand, this short message: "'You
have till ten to-night."
"He had till ten, mother," said I; and just as
I said it, our old clock began striking. This
sudden noise startled us shockingly; but the
news was good, for it was only six.
"Now, Jim," she said, "that key."
I felt in his pockets, one after another. A few
small coins, a thimble, and some thread and
big needles, a piece of pig-tail tobacco bitten
away at the end, his gully° with the crooked
handle, a pocket compass, and a tinder box,
were all that they contained, and I began to
despair. :
"Perhaps it's round his neck," suggested my
mother.
Overcoming a strong repugnance, I tore open
his shirt at the neck, and there, sure enough,
hanging to a bit of tarry string, which I cut
with his own gully, we found the key. At this
triumph we were filled with hope, and hurried
upstairs, without delay, to the little room
THE SEA-CHEST 4I
where he had slept so long, and where his box
had stood since the day of his arrival.
It was like any other seaman's chest on the
outside, the initial ""B." burned on the top of it
with a hot iron, and the corners somewhat
smashed and broken as by long, rough usage.
"Give me the key," said my mother; and
though the lock was very stiff, she had turned
it and thrown back the lid in a twinkling.
A strong smell of tobacco and tar rose from
the interior, but nothing was to be seen on the
top except a suit of very good clothes, carefully
brushed and folded. They had never been worn,
my mother said. Under that, the miscellany®°
began-a quadrant,° a tin canikin,° several
sticks of tobacco, two brace° of very handsome
pistols, a piece of bar silver, an old Spanish
watch, and some other trinkets of little value
and mostly of foreign make, a pair of com-
passes mounted with brass, and five or six
curious West Indian shells. I have often won-
dered since why he should have carried about
these shells with him in his wandering, guilty,
and hunted life.
In the meantime, we had found nothing of
any value but the silver and the trinkets, and
neither of these were in our way. Underneath
there was an old boat-cloak, whitened with sea-
salt on many a harbour-bar. My mother. pulled
it up with impatience, and there lay before us,
uo
2 (=)
42 TREASURE ISLAND
the last things in the chest, a bundle tied up in
oilcloth, and looking like papers, and a canvas
bag, that gave forth, at a touch, the jingle of
gold.
"T'l] show these rogues that I'm an honest
woman," said my mother. "T'll have my dues,
and not a farthing over. Hold Mrs. Crossley's
bag."' And she began to count over the amount
of the captain's score from the sailor's bag into
the one that I was holding.
It was a long, difficult business, for the coins
were of all countries and sizes-doubloons,°
and louis-d'ors,° and guineas,° and pieces of
eight,° and I know not what besides, all shaken
together at random. The guineas, too, were
about the scarcest, and it was with these only
that my mother knew how to make her count.
When we were about half-way through, I
suddenly put my hand upon her:arm; for I had
heard in the silent, frosty air a sound that
brought my heart into my mouth-the tap-
tapping of the blind man's stick upon the
frozen road. It drew nearer and nearer, while
we sat holding our breath. Then it struck sharp
on the inn door, and then we could hear the
handle being turned, and the bolt rattling as
the wretched being tried to enter; and then
there was a long time of silence both within
and without. At last the tapping re-commenced,
and to our indescribable joy and gratitude, died
THE SEA-CHEST 43
slowly away again until it ceased to be heard.
"Mother," said I, "take the whole and let's
be going;" for I was sure the bolted door must
have seemed suspicious, and would bring the
whole hornet's nest about our ears; though how
thankful I was that I had bolted it, none could
tell who had never met that terrible blind man.
But my mother, frightened as she was, would
not consent to take a fraction more than was
due to her, and was obstinately unwilling to be
content with less. It was not yet seven, she
said, by a long way; she knew her rights and
she would have them; and she was still arguing
with me, when a little low whistle sounded a
good way off upon the hill. That was enough,
and more than enough, for both of us.
"T'll take what I have," she said, jumping to
her feet.
"And Ill take this to square the count," said
I, picking up the oilskin packet.
Next moment we were both groping down-
stairs, leaving the candle by the empty chest;
and the next we had opened the door and were
in full retreat. We had not started a moment
too soon. The fog was rapidly dispersing;
already the moon shone quite clear on the high
ground on either side; and it was only in the
exact bottom of the dell and round the tavern
door that a thin veil still hung unbroken, to
conceal the first steps of our escape. Far less
al
o
OO
oO
44 'TREASURE ISLAND
than half-way to the hamlet, very little beyond
the bottom of the hill, we must come forth into
the moonlight. Nor was this all; for the sound
of several footsteps running came already to
our ears, and as we looked back in their direc-
tion, a light tossing to and fro and still rapidly
advancing, showed that one of the new-comers
carried a lantern.
"My dear," said my mother suddenly, "take
the money and run on. I am going to faint."
This was certainly the end for both of us, I
thought. How I cursed the cowardice of the
neighbours; how I blamed my poor mother for
her honesty and her greed, for her past fool-
hardiness and present weakness! We were just
at the little bridge, by good fortune; and I
helped her, tottering as she was, to the edge
of the bank, where, sure enough, she gave a
sigh and fell on my shoulder. I do not know
how I found the strength to do it at all, and
I am afraid it was roughly done; but I man-
aged to drag her down the bank and a little
way under the arch. Farther I could not move
her, for the bridge was too low to let me do
more than crawl below it. So there we had to
stay-my mother almost entirely exposed, and
both of us within earshot of the inn.
CHAPTER V
THE LAST oF THE BLIND MAN
My curiosity, in a sense, was stronger than
my fear; for I could not remain where I was,
but crept back to the bank again, whence,
sheltering my head behind a bush of broom, I
might command the road before our door. I
was scarcely in position ere my enemies began
to arrive, seven or eight of them, running hard,
their feet beating out of time along the road,
and the man with the lantern some paces in
front. Three men ran together, hand in hand;
and I made out, even through the mist, that the
middle man of this trio was the blind beggar.
The next moment his voice showed me that I
was right.
"Down with the door!" he cried.
"Ay, ay, sir!"? answered two or three; and a
rush was made upon the "Admiral Benbow,"
the lantern-bearer following; and then I could
see them pause, and hear speeches passed in a
lower key, as if they were surprised to find the
door open. But the pause was brief, for the
blind man again issued his commands. His
voice sounded louder and higher, as if he were
afire with eagerness and rage.
or
ol
1 (-)
2 Oo
46 TREASURE ISLAND
"Tn, in, in!" he shouted, and cursed them for
their delay.
Four or five of them obeyed at once, two
remaining on the road with the formidable
beggar. There was a pause, then a cry of sur-
prise, and then a voice shouting from the
house: -
"Bill's dead!"
But the blind man swore at them again for
their delay.
"Search him, some of you shirking lubbers,
and the rest of you aloft and get the chest," he
cried.
I could hear their feet rattling up our old
stairs, so that the house must have shook with
it. Promptly afterwards, fresh sounds of aston-
ishment arose; the window of the captain's
room was thrown open with a slam and a
jingle of broken glass; and a man leaned out
into the moonlight,-head and shoulders, and
addressed the blind beggar on the road below
him.
"Pew," he cried, '"they've been before us.
Someone's turned the chest out alow and aloft."
"Ts it there?" roared Pew.
"The money's there."
The blind man cursed the money.
"Flint's fist,° I mean," he cried.
"We don't see it here nohow," returned the
man.
Tue LAST oF THE BLIND Man 47
"Here, you below there, is it on Bill?" cried
the blind man again.
At that, another fellow, probably him who
had remained below to search the captain's
body, came to the door of the inn. "Bill's
been overhauled a'ready," said he, 'nothin'
tert."
"Tt's these people of the inn-it's that boy.
I wish I had put his eyes out!" cried the blind
man, Pew. "They were here no time ago-they
had the door bolted when I tried it. Scatter,
lads, and find 'em."
"Sure enough, they left their glim° here,"
said the fellow from the window.
"Scatter and find 'em! Rout the house out!"
reiterated Pew, striking with his stick upon the
road.
Then there followed a great to-do through all
our old inn, heavy feet pounding to and fro,
furniture thrown over, doors kicked in, until
the very rocks re-echoed, and the men came
out again, one after another, on the road, and
declared that we were nowhere to be found.
And just then the same whistle that had
alarmed my mother and myself over the dead
captain's money was once more clearly audible
through the night, but this time twice repeated.
I had thought it to be the blind man's trumpet,
so to speak, summoning his crew to the assault;
but I now found that it was a signal from the
ot
oO
48 TREASURE ISLAND
hillside towards the hamlet, and, from its effect
upon the buccaneers, a signal to warn them of
approaching danger.
"There's Dirk again,' said one. "Twice!
We'll have to budge, mates."
"Budge, you skulk!" cried Pew. "Dirk was
a fool and a coward from the first-you
wouldn't mind him. They must be close by;
they can't be far; you have your hands on it.
Scatter and look for them, dogs! Oh, shiver my
soul," he cried, "if I had eyes!"
This appeal seemed to produce some effect,
for two of the fellows began to look here and
there among the lumber, but half-heartedly, I
thought, and with half an eye to their own
danger all the time, while the rest stood irreso-
lute on the road.
"You have your hands on thousands, you
fools, and you hang a leg! You'd be as rich as
kings if you could find it, and you know it's
here, and you stand there skulking. There
wasn't one of you dared face Bill, and I did it.
-a blind man! And I'm to lose my chance for
you! I'm to be a poor, crawling beggar, spong-
ing for rum, when I might be rolling in a coach!
If you had the pluck of a weevil in a biscuit
you would catch them still."
"Hang it, Pew, we've got the doubloons!"
grumbled one.
"They might have hid the blessed thing,"
THE Last oF THE BLIND Man 49
said another. "Take the Georges°, Pew, and
don't stand here squalling."'
Squalling was the word for it, Pew's anger
rose so high at these objections; till at last, his
passion completely taking the upper hand, he
struck at them right and left in his blindness,
and his stick sounded heavily on more than
one.
These, in their turn, cursed back at the blind
miscreant,° threatened him in horrid terms, and
tried in vain to catch the stick and wrest it
from his grasp.
This quarrel was the saving of us; for while
it was still raging, another sound came from the
top of the hill on the side of the hamlet-the
tramp of horses galloping. Almost at the same
time a pistol-shot, flash and report, came from
the hedge side. And that was plainly the last
signal of danger; for the buccaneers turned at
once and ran, separating in every direction,
one seaward along the cove, one slant across
the hill, and so on, so that in half a minute not
a sign of them remained but Pew. Him they
had deserted, whether in sheer panic or out of
revenge for his ill words and blows, I know
not; but there he remained behind, tapping up
and down the road in a frenzy, and groping and
calling for his comrades. Finally he took the
wrong turn, and ran a few steps past me,
towards the hamlet, crying: -
On
50 TREASURE ISLAND
"Johnny, Black Dog, Dirk,' and other
names, "'you won't leave old Pew, mates-not ..
old Pew!"
Just then the noise of horses topped the rise,
and four or five riders came in sight in the
moonlight, and swept at full gallop down the
slope.
At this Pew saw his error, turned with a
scream, and ran straight for the ditch, into
which he rolled. But he was on his feet again in
a second, and made another dash, now utterly
bewildered, right under the nearest of the
coming horses. :
The rider tried to save him, but in vain.
Down went Pew with a cry that rang high into
the night; and the four hoofs trampled and
spurned him and passed by. He fell on his side,
then gently collapsed upon his face, and moved
no more.
I leaped to my feet and hailed the riders.
They were pulling up, at any rate, horrified at
the accident; and I soon saw what they were.
One, tailing out behind the rest, was a lad that
had gone from the hamlet to Dr. Livesey's; the
rest were revenue officers, whom he had met by
the way, and with whom he had had the intel-
ligence to return at once. Some news of the
lugger in Kitt's Hole had found its way to
Supervisor Dance, and set him forth that night
in our direction, and to that circumstance my
Tue Last OF THE BLIND MAN 51
mother and I owed our preservation from death.
Pew was dead, stone dead. As for my mother,
when we had carried her up to the hamlet, a
little cold water and salts, and that soon
brought her back again, and she was none the
worse for her terror, though she still continued
to deplore the balance of the money. In the
meantime the supervisor rode on, as fast as he
could, to Kitt's Hole; but his men had to dis-
mount and grope down the dingle,° leading,
_and sometimes supporting, their horses, and in
continual fear of ambushes; so it was no great
matter for surprise that when they got down
to the Hole the lugger was already under way,
though still close in. He hailed her. A voice
replied. telling him to keep out of the moon-
light, or he would get some lead in him, and at
the same time a bullet whistled close by his
arm. Soon after, the lugger doubled the point
and disappeared. Mr. Dance stood there, as he
said, "like a fish out of water," and all he could
do was to despatch a man to B to warn the
cutter. "And that," said he, "is just about as
good as nothing. They've got off clean, and
there's an end. Only," he added, 'I'm glad I
trod on Master Pew's corns;"' for by this time
he had heard my story.
I went back with him to the 'Admiral Ben-
bow," and you cannot imagine a house in such
a state of smash; the very clock had been
oO
ol
52 TREASURE ISLAND
thrown down by these fellows in their furious
hunt after my mother and myself; and though
nothing had actually been taken away except
the captain's money-bag and a little silver
from the till, I could see at once that we were
ruined. Mr. Dance could make nothing of the
scene.
"They got the money, you say? Well, then,
Hawkins, what in fortune were they after?
More money, I suppose?"
"No, sir; not money, I think," replied I. "In
fact, sir, I believe I have the thing in my breast-
pocket; and, to tell you the truth, I should like
to get it put in safety."
"To be sure, boy; quite right," said he. "Tl
take it, if you like."
"T thought, perhaps, Dr. Livesey-" I began.
"Perfectly right,' he interrupted, very
cheerily, "perfectly right-a gentleman and a
magistrate. And, now I come to think of it, I
might as well ride round there myself and
report to him or squire. Master Pew's dead,
when all's done; not that I regret it, but he's
dead, you see, and people. will make it out
against an officer of his Majesty's revenue, if
make it out they can. Now, [ll tell you, Haw-
kins: if you like, Pll take you along."
I thanked him heartily for the offer, and we
walked back to the hamlet, where the horses
THE Last oF THE BLIND MAN be
were. By the time I had told mother of my
purpose they were all in the saddle.
"Dogger," said Mr. Dance, "'you have a good
horse; take up this lad behind you."
As soon as I was mounted, holding on to 5
Dogger's belt, the supervisor gave the word, and
the party struck out at a bouncing trot on the
road to Dr. Livesey's house.
CHAPTER VI
THE CAPTAIN'S PAPERS
WE rode hard all the way, till we drew up
before Dr. Livesey's door. The house was all
dark to the front.
Mr. Dance told me to jump down and knock,
5 and Dogger gave me a stirrup to descend by.
1 oO
The door was opened almost at once by the
maid.
"Ts Dr. Livesey in?" I asked.
No, she said; he had come home in the after-
noon, but had gone up to the Hall to dine and
pass the evening with the squire.
"So there we go, boys," said Mr. Dance.
This time, as the distance was short, I did
not mount, but ran with Dogger's stirrup-
leather to the lodge gates, and up the long,
leafless, moonlit avenue to where the white line
of the Hall buildings looked on either hand on
great old gardens. Here Mr. Dance dismounted,
and, taking me along with him, was admitted
at a word into the house.
The servant led us down a matted passage,
all lined with bookcases and busts upon the
top of them, where the squire and Dr. Livesey
sat, pipe in hand, on either side of a bright fire.
THE CAPTAIN'S PAPERS 55
I had never seen the squire so near at hand.
He was a tall man, over six feet high, and broad
in proportion, and he had a bluff, rough-and-
ready face, all roughened and reddened and
lined in his long travels. His eyebrows were
very black, and moved readily, and this gave
him a look of some temper, not bad, you would
say, but quick and high.
"Come in, Mr. Dance," says he, very stately
and condescending.
"Good-evening, Dance," says the doctor,
with a nod. "And good-evening to you, friend
Jim. What good wind brings you here?"'
The supervisor stood up straight and stiff,
and told his story like a lesson; and you should
have seen how the two gentlemen leaned for-
ward and looked at each other, and forgot to
smoke in their surprise and interest. When they
heard how my mother went back to the inn,
Dr. Livesey fairly slapped his thigh, and the
squire cried "Bravo!" and broke his long pipe
against the grate. Long before it was done, Mr.
Trelawney (that, you will remember, was the
squire's name) had got up from his seat, and
was striding about the room, and the doctor,
as if to hear the better, had taken off his
powdered wig, and sat there, looking very
strange indeed with his own close-cropped,
At last Mr. Dance finished the story.
or
ay 5
ol
56 TREASURE ISLAND
"Mr. Dance," said the squire, "you are a
very noble fellow. And as for riding down that
black, atrocious miscreant, I regard it as an
act of virtue, sir, like stamping on a cockroach.
This lad Hawkins is a trump, I perceive. Haw-
kins, will you ring that bell? Mr. Dance must
have some ale."
"And so, Jim," said the doctor, "you have
the thing that they were after, have you?"
"Here it is, sir,' said I, and gave him the
oilskin packet.
The doctor looked it all over, as if his fingers
were itching to open it; but, instead of doing
that, he put it quietly in the pocket of his coat.
"Squire," said he, "when Dance has had his
ale he must, of course, be off on his Majesty's
service; but I mean to keep Jim Hawkins here
to sleep at my house, and, with your permis-
sion, I propose we should have up the cold pie,
and let him sup."
"As you will, Livesey," said the squire;
"Hawkins has earned better than cold pie."
So a big pigeon pie was brought in and put
on a side-table, and I made a hearty supper,
for I was as hungry as a hawk, while Mr.
Dance was further complimented, and at last
dismissed.
"And now, squire," said the doctor.
"And now, Livesey," said the squire, in the
same breath.
THE CapTAIN's PAPERS ¢)
"One at a time, one at a time," laughed Dr.
Livesey. "You have heard of this Flint, I sup-
pose?"'
"Heard of him!" cried the squire. "Heard of
him, you say! He was the bloodthirstiest buc-
caneer that sailed. Blackbeard° was a child to
Flint. The Spaniards were so prodigiously
afraid of him, that, I tell you, sir, I was some-
times proud he was an Englishman. I've seen
his top-sails with these eyes, off Trinidad,° and
the cowardly son of a rum-puncheon that I
sailed with put back-put back, sir, into Port
of Spain."
"Well, I've heard of him myself, in Eng-
land," said the doctor. "But the point is, had
he money?"
"Money!" cried the squire. "Have you heard
the story? What were these villains after but
money? What do they care for but money?
For what would they risk their rascal carcasses
but money?"
"That we shall soon know," replied the doc-
tor. "But you are so confoundedly hot-headed
and exclamatory that I cannot get a word in.
What I want to know is this: Supposing that I
have here in my pocket some clue to where
Flint buried his treasure, will that treasure
amount to much?"
"Amount, sir!" cried the squire. "It will
amount to this: if we have the clue you talk
Or
or
o Z
oO 2
58 TREASURE ISLAND
about, I fit out a ship in Bristol dock, and take
you and Hawkins here along, and I'll have that
treasure if I search a year."
"Very well," said the doctor. "Now, then, if
Jim is agreeable, we'll open the packet;" and he
laid it before him on the table.
The bundle was sewn together, and the doc-
tor had to get out his instrument-case, and cut
the stitches with his medical scissors. It con-
tained two things-a book and a sealed paper.
"First of all we'll try the book," observed
the doctor.
The squire and I were both peering over his
shoulder as he opened it, for Dr. Livesey had
kindly motioned me to come round from the
side-table, where I had been eating, to enjoy
the sport of the search. On the first page there
were orly some scraps of writing, such as a
man with a pen in his hand might make for
idleness or practice. One was the same as the
tattoo mark, "Billy Bones his fancy;" then
there was "Mr. W. Bones, mate." "No more
rum." "Off Palm Key he got itt;" and some
other snatches, mostly single words and un-
intelligible. I could not help wondering who it
was that had "got itt," and what "itt" was that
he got. A knife in his back as like as not.
"Not much instruction there,' said Dr.
Livesey, as he passed on.
The next ten or twelve pages were filled
THE CAPTAIN'S PAPERS 59
with a curious series of entries. There was a
date at one end of the line and at the other a
sum of money, as in common account-books;
but instead of explanatory writing, only a vary-
ing number of crosses between the two. On the
12th of June, 1745, for instance, a sum of
seventy pounds had plainly become due to
someone, and there was nothing but six crosses
to explain the cause. In a few cases, to be sure,
the name of a place would be added, as "'Offe
Caraccas°;"' or a mere entry of latitude and
The record lasted over nearly twenty years,
the amount of the separate entries growing
larger as time went on, and at the end a grand
total had been made out after five or six wrong
additions, and these words appended, "Bones,
his pile."
"T can't make head or tail of this," said
Dr. Livesey.
"The thing is as clear as noonday," cried the
squire. "This is the black-hearted hound's
account-book. These crosses stand for the
names of ships or towns that they sank or
plundered. The sums are the scoundrel's share,
and where he feared an ambiguity, you see he
added something clearer. 'Offe Caraccas,' now;
you see, here was some unhappy vessel boarded
off that coast. God help the poor souls that
manned her-coral long ago."
ot
al o
al oO
60 d TREASURE ISLAND
"Right!" said the doctor. "See what it is to
be a traveller. Right! And the amounts in-
crease, you see, as he rose in rank."
There was little else in the volume but a few
bearings® of places noted in the blank leaves
towards the end, and a table for reducing
French, English, and Spanish moneys to a com-
mon value.
"Thrifty man!" cried the doctor. '""He wasn't
the one to be cheated."
"And now," said the squire, "for the other."
The paper had been sealed in several places
with a thimble by way of seal; the very thim-
ble, perhaps, that I had found in the captain's
pocket. The doctor opened the seals with great
care, and there fell out the map of an island,
with latitude and longitude, soundings, names
of hills, and bays and inlets, and every par-
ticular that would be needed to bring a ship to
a safe anchorage upon its shores. It was about
nine miles long and five across, shaped, you
might say, like a fat dragon standing up, and
had two fine land-locked harbours, and a hill in
the centre part marked "The Spyglass." There
were several additions of a later date; but,
above all, three crosses of red ink-two on the
north part of the island, one in the south-west,
and, beside this last, in the same red ink, and
in a small, neat hand, very different from the
THE CAPTAIN'S PAPERS 61
captain's tottery characters, these words:-
"Bulk of treasure here."
Over on the back the same hand had written
this further information:-
"Tall tree, Spyglass shoulder, bearing a point
to the N. of N.N.E.
"Skeleton Island E.S.E. and by E.
EL encteet:
"The bar silver is in the north cache°; you can
find it by the trend of the east hummock, ten
fathoms south of the black crag with the face on it.
"The arms are easy found, in the sand hill, N.
point of north inlet cape, bearing E. and a quarter
AB Ab 1
That was all; but brief as it was, and, to me,
incomprehensible, it filled the squire and Dr.
Livesey with delight.
"Livesey," said the squire, "you will give up
this wretched practice at once. To-morrow I
start for Bristol. In three weeks' time-three
weeks!-two weeks-ten days-we'll have the
ia)
best ship, sir, and the choicest crew in England. '
Hawkins shall come as cabin-boy. You'll make
a famous cabin-boy, Hawkins. You, Livesey,
are ship's doctor; I am admiral. We'll take
Redruth, Joyce, and Hunter. We'll have favour-
able winds, a quick passage, and not the least
ot
i oO
62 TREASURE ISLAND
difficulty in finding the spot, and money to eat
-to roll in-to play duck and drake° with
ever after."
"Trelawney," said the doctor, "I'll go with
you; and, ['ll go bail for it, so will Jim, and be
a credit to the undertaking. There's only one
man I'm afraid of."
"And who's that?" cried the squire. ""Name
the dog, sir!"
"You," replied the doctor; "for you cannot
hold your tongue. We are not the only men who
know of this paper. These fellows who attacked
the inn to-night-bold, desperate blades, for
sure-and the rest who stayed aboard that
lugger, and more, I daresay, not far off, are, one
and all, through thick and thin, bound that
they'll get that money. We must none of us
go alone till we get to sea. Jim and I shall stick
together in the meanwhile; you'll take Joyce
and Hunter when you ride to Bristol, and, from
first to last, not one of us must breathe a word
of what we've found."
"Livesey," returned the squire, ''you are
always in the right of it. I'll be as silent as the
grave."
PART II
"THE SEA COOK
CHAPTER VII
I Go to BristToL
Ir was longer than the squire imagined ere
we were ready for the sea, and none of our
first plans-not even Dr. Livesey's, of keeping
me beside him-could be carried out as we in-
tended. The doctor had to go to London for a
physician to take charge of his practice; the
squire was hard at work at Bristol; and I lived
on at the Hall under the charge of old Redruth,
the gamekeeper, almost a prisoner, but full of
sea-dreams and the most charming anticipations
of strange islands and adventures. I brooded
by the hour together over the map, all the de-
tails of which I well remembered. Sitting by
the fire in the housekeeper's room, I ap-
proached that island in my fancy, from every
possible direction; I explored every acre of its
surface; I climbed a thousand times to that
tall hill they call the Spyglass, and from the
top enjoyed the most wonderful and changing
prospects. Sometimes the isle was thick with
savages, with whom we fought; sometimes full
of dangerous animals that hunted us; but in
all my fancies nothing occurred to me so
strange and tragic as our actual adventures.
oO
66 TREASURE ISLAND
So the weeks passed on, till one fine day
there came a letter addressed to Dr. Livesey,
with this addition, '""To be opened, in the case
of his absence, by Tom Redruth, or young
5 Hawkins." Obeying this order, we found, or
rather, I found-for the gamekeeper was a
poor hand at reading anything but print-the
following important news:-
"Old Anchor Inn, Bristol, March 1, 17-.
10 "Dear Livesry,-As I do not know whether you
are at the Hall or still in London, I send this in
double to both places.
"The ship is bought and fitted. She lies at an-
chor, ready for sea. You never imagined a sweeter
15 schooner-a child might sail her-two hundred
tons; name, Hispaniola.
"TI got her through my old friend, Blandly, who
has proved himself throughout the most surprising
trump. The admirable fellow literally slaved in my
20 interest, and so, I may say, did everyone in Bristol,
as soon as they got wind of the port we sailed for-
treasure, I mean."
"Redruth," said I, interrupting the letter,
"Dr. Livesey will not like that. The squire has
25 been talking, after all."
"Well, who's a better right?" growled the
gamekeeper. "A pretty rum go°® if squire ain't
to talk for Dr. Livesey, I should think."
At that I gave up all attempt at commentary,
30 and read straight on:-
I Go To BristToL 67
"Blandly himself found the Hispaniola, and by
the most admirable management got her for the
merest trifle. There is a class of men in Bristol
monstrously prejudiced against Blandly. They go
the length of declaring that this honest creature
would do anything for money, that the Hispaniola
belonged to him, and that he sold it me absurdly
high-the most transparent calumnies.° None of
them dare, however, to deny the merits of the ship.
"So far there was not:a hitch. The workpeople,
to be sure-riggers and what not-were most an-
noyingly slow; but time cured that. It was the
crew that troubled me.
"T wished a round score of men-in case of na-
tives, buccaneers, or the odious French-and I had
the worry of the deuce itself to find so much as half
a dozen, till the most remarkable stroke of fortune
brought me the very man that I required.
"TI was standing on the dock, when, by the mer-
est accident, I fell in talk with him. I found he
was an old sailor, kept a public-house, knew all the
seafaring men in Bristol, had lost his health ashore,
and wanted a good berth as cook to get to sea
again. He had hobbled down there that morning,
he said, to get a smell of the salt.
"T was monstrously touched-so would you have
been-and, out of pure pity, I engaged him on the
spot to be ship's cook. Long John Silver, he is
called, and has lost a leg; but that I regarded as
a recommendation, since he lost it in his country's
service, under the immortal Hawke. He has no
OV
1 ol
bo oO
68 TREASURE ISLAND
pension, Livesey. Imagine the abominable age we
live in!
"Well, sir, I thought I had only found a cook,
but it was a crew I had discovered. Between Silver
and myself we got together in a few days a com-
pany of the toughest old salts imaginable-not
pretty to look at, but fellows, by their faces, of the
most indomitable spirit. I declare we could fight a
frigate.
"Long John even got rid of two out of the six or
seven I had already engaged. He showed me in a
moment that they were just the sort of fresh water
swabs we had to fear in an adventure of importance.
"JT am in the most magnificent health and spir-
its, eating like a bull, sleeping like a tree, yet I shall
not enjoy a moment till I hear my old tarpaulins®
tramping round the capstan. Seaward ho! Hang the
treasure! It's the glory of the sea that has turned
my head. So now, Livesey, come post;° do not lose
an hour if you respect me.
"Let young Hawkins go at once to see his mother,
with Redruth for a guard; and then both come
full speed to Bristol.
"JOHN TRELAWNEY.
"Postscript -I did not tell you that Blandly,
who, by the way, is to send a consort® after us if
we don't turn up by the end of August, had found
an admirable fellow for sailing master-a stiff man,
which I regret, but, in all other respects, a treas-
ure. Long John Silver unearthed a very competent
man for a mate, a man named Arrow. I have a boat-
swain who pipes, Livesey; so things shall go man-
I Go To BristTor 69
o'-war fashion on board the good ship His-
paniola.
"T forgot to tell you that Silver is a man of sub-
stance; I know of my own knowledge that he has
a banker's account, which has never been over-
drawn. He leaves his wife to manage the inn; and
as she is a woman of colour, a pair of old bachelors
like you and I may be excused for guessing that
it is the wife, quite as much as the health, that
sends him back to roving.
sd a
"P.P.S-Hawkins may stay one night with his
mother.
bo fed oy
You can fancy the excitement into which that
letter put me. I was half beside myself with
glee; and if ever I despised a man, it was old
Tom Redruth, who could do nothing but grum-
ble and lament. Any of the under-gamekeepers
would gladly have changed places with him; =
but such was not the squire's pleasure, and the
squire's pleasure was like law among them all.
Nobody but Old Redruth would have dared so
much as even to grumble.
The next morning he and I set out on foot
for the "Admiral Benbow," and there I found
my mother in good health and spirits. The cap-
tain, who had so long been a cause of so much
discomfort, was gone where the wicked cease
from troubling. The squire had had everything
repaired, and the public rooms and the sign
or
on
Or
oO
70 TREASURE ISLAND
repainted, and had added some furniture-
above all a beautiful armchair for mother in
the bar. He had found her a boy as an appren-
tice also, so that she should not want help while
J was gone.
It was on seeing that boy that I understood,
for the first time, my situation. I had thought
up to that moment of the adventures before
me, not at all of the home that I was leaving;
and now, at sight of this clumsy stranger, who
was to stay here in my place beside my mother,
I had my first attack of tears. I am afraid I led
that boy a dog's life; for as he was new to the
work, I had a hundred opportunities of setting
him right and putting him down, and I was not
slow to profit by them.
The night passed, and the next day, after
dinner, Redruth and I were afoot again, and
on the road. I said good-bye to mother and the
cove where I had lived since I was born, and
the dear old "Admiral Benbow"'-since he was
repainted, no longer quite so dear. One of my
last thoughts was of the captain, who had so
often strode along the beach with his cocked
hat, his sabre-cut cheek, and his old brass tele-
scope. Next moment we had turned the corner,
and my home was out of sight.
The mail picked us up about dusk at the
"Royal George" on the heath. I was wedged in
I Go To BristoL a0
between Redruth and a stout old gentleman,
and in spite of the swift motion and the cold
night air, I must have dozed a great deal from
the very first, and then slept like a log up hill
and down dale through stage after stage; for
when I was awakened, at last, it was by a punch
in the ribs, and I opened my eyes, to find that
we were standing still before a large building
in a city street, and that the day had already
broken a long time.
"Where are we?" I asked.
"Bristol," said Tom. "Get down."
Mr. Trelawney had taken up his residence at
an inn far down the docks, to superintend the
work upon the schooner. Thither we had now
to walk, and our way, to my great delight,
lay along the quays° and beside the great mul-
titude of ships of all sizes and rigs and nations.
In one, sailors were singing at their work; in
another, there were men aloft, high over my
head, hanging to threads that seemed no thicker
than a spider's. Though I had lived by the
shore all my life, I seemed never to have been
near the sea till then. The smell of tar and
salt was something new. I saw the most won-
derful figureheads,° that had all been far over
the ocean. I saw, besides, many old sailors,
with rings in their ears, and whiskers curled
in ringlets, and tarry pigtails, and their swag-
al
On
72 TREASURE ISLAND
gering, clumsy sea-walk; and if I had seen as
many kings or archbishops I could not have
been more delighted.
And I was going to sea myself; to sea in a
schooner, with a piping boatswain, and pig-
tailed singing seamen, to sea, bound for an
unknown island, and to seek for buried treas-
ures!
While I was still in this delightful dream, we
came suddenly in front of a large inn, and met
Squire Trelawney, all dressed out like a sea-
officer, in stout blue cloth, coming out of the
door with a smile on his face, and a capital
imitation of a sailor's walk.
"Here you are," he cried, "and the doctor
came last night from London. Bravo! the ship's
company complete!"
"Oh, sir," cried I, "when do we sail?"
"Sail!" says he. "We sail to-morrow!"
CHAPTER VIII
AT THE SIGN OF THE "SPYGLASS"
WHEN I had done breakfasting the squire
gave me a note addressed to John Silver, at the
sign of the "Spyglass,'' and told me I should
easily find the place by following the line of the
docks, and keeping a bright look-out for a little
tavern with a large brass telescope for sign.
I set off, overjoyed at this opportunity to see
some more of the ships and seamen, and picked
my way among a great crowd of people and
carts and bales, for the dock was now at its
busiest, until I found the tavern in question.
It was a bright enough little place of enter-
tainment. The sign was newly painted; the win-
dows had neat red curtains; the floor was
cleanly sanded. There was a street on either
side, and an open door on both, which made
the large, low room pretty clear to see in, in
spite of clouds of tobacco smoke.
The customers were mostly seafaring men;
and they talked so loudly that I hung at the
door, almost afraid to enter.
As I was waiting, a man came out of a side
room, and, at a glance, I was sure he must be
Long John. His left leg was cut off close by the
or
1 Or
74 TREASURE ISLAND
hip, and under the left shoulder he carried a
crutch, which he managed with wonderful dex-
terity, hopping about upon it like a bird. He
was very tall and strong, with a face as big
as a ham-plain and pale, but intelligent and
smiling. Indeed, he seemed in the most cheerful
spirits, whistling as he moved about among the
tables, with a merry word or a slap on the
shoulder for the more favoured of his guests.
Now, to tell you the truth, from the very first
mention of Long John in Squire Trelawney's
letter, I had taken a fear in my mind that he
might prove to be the very one-legged sailor
whom I had watched for so long at the old
"Benbow." But one look at the man before me
was enough. I had seen the captain, and Black
Dog, and the blind man Pew, and I thought I
knew what a buccaneer was like-a very dif-
ferent creature, according to me, from this
clean and pleasant-tempered landlord.
I plucked up courage at once, crossed the
threshold, and walked right up to the man
where he stood, propped on his crutch, talking
to a customer.
"Mr. Silver, sir?" I asked, holding out the
note.
"Yes, my lad," said he; "such is my name, to
be sure. And who may you be?" And then as
he saw the squire's letter, he seemed to me to
give something almost like a start.
AT THE SIGN OF THE "SPYGLASS" oh
"Oh!" said he, quite loud,° and offering his
hand, "I see. You are our new cabin-boy;
pleased I am to see you."
And he took my hand in his large firm
grasp.
Just then one of the customers at the far
side rose suddenly and made for the door. It
was close by him, and he was out in the street
in a moment. But his hurry had attracted my
notice, and I recognized him at a glance. It was
the tallow-faced man, wanting two fingers, who
had come first to the "Admiral Benbow."
"Oh," I cried, "stop him! it's Black Dog!"
"T don't care two coppers who he is," cried
Silver. "But he hasn't paid his score. Harry,
run and catch him."
One of the others who was noes the door
leaped up, and started in pursuit.
"Tf he were Admiral Hawke he shall pay his
score," cried Silver; and then, relinquishing : 2] 7) )
my hand-'Who did you say he was?" he
asked. 'Black what?"
"Dog, sir," said I. "Has Mr. Trelawney not
told you of the buccaneers? He was one of
them."
"So?" cried Silver. "In my house! Ben, run
and help Harry. One of those swabs, was he?
Was that you drinking with him, Morgan? Step
up here."
The man whom he called Morgan-an old
or
a
oO
i:
o
or
76 TREASURE ISLAND
grey-haired, mahogany-faced sailor-came for-
ward pretty sheepishly, rolling his quid.
"Now, Morgan," said Long John, very stern-
ly; "you never clapped your -eyes on that
Black-Black Dog before, did you, now?"
"Not I, sir," said Morgan, with a salute.
"You didn't know his name, did you?"' (73 ans PP) »
No, sir.
"By the powers, Tom Morgan, it's as good
for you!" exclaimed the landlord. "If you had
been mixed up with the like of that, you would -
never have put another foot in my house, you
may lay to that. And what was he saying to
your"
"J don't rightly know, sir,' answered Mor-
gan.
"Do you call that a head on your shoulders,
or a blessed dead-eye°?" cried Long John.
"Don't rightly know, don't you! Perhaps you
don't happen to rightly know who you was
speaking to, perhaps? Come, now, what was he
jawing-v'yages, cap'ns, ships? Pipe up! What
was it?"
"We was a-talkin' of keel-hauling,°" an-
swered Morgan.
"Keel-hauling, was you? and a mighty suit-
able thing, too, and you may lay to that. Get
back to your place for a lubber, Tom."
And then, as Morgan rolled back to his seat,
AT THE SIGN OF THE "SpycGLass" a7
Silver added to me in a confidential whisper,
that was very flattering, as I thought:-
"He's quite an honest man, Tom Morgan,
on'y stupid. And now," he ran on again, aloud,
"let's see-Black Dog? No, I don't know the
name, not I. Yet I kind of think I've-yes, I've
seen the swab. He used to come here with a
blind beggar, he used."
"That he did, you may be sure," said I. "I
knew that blind man, too. His name was Pew."
"Tt was!" cried Silver, now quite excited.
"Pew! That were his name for certain. Ah, he
looked a shark, he did! If we run down this
Black Dog, now, there'll be news for Cap'n
Trelawney! Ben's a good runner; few seamen
run better than Ben. He should run him down,
hand over hand, by the powers! He talked 0'
keel-hauling, did he? J'// keel-haul him!"
All the time he was jerking out these phrases
he was stumping up and down the tavern on
his crutch, slapping tables with his hand, and
giving such a show of excitement as would have
convinced an Old Bailey judge or a Bow Street
runner. My suspicions had been thoroughly
reawakened on finding Black Dog at the "Spy-
glass," and I watched the cook narrowly. But
he was too deep, and too ready, and too clever
for me, and by the time the two men had come
back out of breath, and confessed that they
or
Oo
1 mai
2 ot
78 TREASURE ISLAND
had lost the track in a crowd, and been scolded
like thieves, I would have gone bail for the
innocence of Long John Silver.
"See here, now, Hawkins," said he, "here's
a blessed hard thing on a man like me, now,
ain't it? There's Cap'n Trelawney-what's he
to think? Here I have this confounded son of
a Dutchman sitting in my own house, drinking
of my own rum! Here you comes and tells me
of it plain; and here I let him give us all the
slip before my blessed dead-lights! Now, Haw-
kins, you do me justice with the cap'n. You're
a lad, you are, but you're as smart as paint. I
see that when you first came in. Now, here it
is: What could I do, with this old timber I
hobble on? When I was an A B master mariner
I'd have come up alongside of him, hand over
hand, and broached him to in a brace of old
'shakes, I would; but now-"
And then, all of a sudden, he stopped, and
his jaw dropped, as though he had remembered
something.
"The. score!" he burst out. "Three goes 0'
rum! Why, shiver my timbers, if I hadn't for-
gotten my score!"
And, falling on a bench, he laughed until the
tears ran down his cheeks. I could not help
joining; and we laughed together, peal after
peal, until the tavern rang again.
"Why, what a precious old sea-calf I am!"
AT THE SIGN OF THE "SpyGLass"' 79
he said, at last, wiping his cheeks. "You and
me should get on well, Hawkins, for I'll take
my davy° I should be rated ship's boy. But,
come, now, stand by to go about.° This won't
do. Dooty is dooty, messmates. Ill put on my
old cocked hat, and step along of you to Cap'n
Trelawney, and report this here affair. For,
mind you, it's serious, young Hawkins; and
neither you nor me's come out of it with what
I should make so bold as to call credit. Nor
you neither, says you; not smart-none of the
pair of us smart. But dash my buttons! that
was a good 'un about my score."
And he began to laugh again, and that so
heartily, that though I did not see the joke
as he did, I was again obliged to join him in
his mirth.
On our little walk along the quays, he made
himself the most interesting companion, tell-
ing me about the different ships that we passed
by, their rig, tonnage, and nationality, explain-
ing the work that was going forward-how one
was discharging, another taking in cargo, and
a third making ready for sea; and every now
and then telling me some little anecdote of
ships or seamen, or repeating a nautical phrase
till I had learned it perfectly. I began to see
that here was one of the best of possible ship-
mates.
When we got to the inn, the squire and Dr.
or
oO
1 eat
80 TREASURE ISLAND
Livesey were seated together, finishing a quart
of ale with a toast in it, before they should go
aboard the schooner on a visit of inspection.
Long John told the story from first to last,
with a great deal of spirit and the most perfect
truth. "That was how it were, now, weren't it,
Hawkins?" he would say, now and again, and
I could always bear him entirely out.
The two gentlemen regretted that Black Dog
had got away; but we all agreed there was
nothing to be done, and after he had been com-
plimented, Long John took up his crutch and
departed.
"All hands aboard by four this afternoon,"
shouted the squire after him.
"Ay, ay, sir," cried the cook, in the passage.
"Well, squire," said Dr. Livesey, "I don't
put much faith in your discoveries, as a general
thing; but I will say this, John Silver suits
me."
"The man's a perfect trump," declared the
squire.
"And now," added the doctor, "Jim may
come on board with us, may he not?"
"To be sure he may," says squire. 'Take
your hat, Hawkins, and we'll see the ship."
CHAPTER IX
POWDER AND ARMS
THE Hispaniola lay some way out, and we
went under the figureheads and round the
sterns of many other ships, and their cables
sometimes grated underneath our keel, and
sometimes swung above us. At last, however,
we got alongside, and were met and saluted
as we stepped aboard by the mate, Mr. Arrow,
a brown old sailor, with earrings in his ears and
a squint. He and the squire were very thick
and friendly, but I soon observed that things
were not the same between Mr. Trelawney and
the captain.
This last was a sharp-looking man, who
seemed angry with everything on board, and
was soon to tell us why, for we had hardly got
down into the cabin when a sailor followed us.
"Captain Smollett, sir, axing to speak with
you," said he.
"T am always at the captain's orders. Show
him in," said the squire.
The captain, who was close behind his mes-
senger, entered at once, and shut the door be-
hind him.
"Well, Captain Smollett, what have you to
oO
82 TREASURE ISLAND
say? All well, I hope; all shipshape and sea-
worthy?"
"Well, sir," said the captain, "better speak
plain, I believe, even at the risk of offence. I
don't like this cruise; I don't like the men;
and I don't like my officer. That's short and
sweet."
"Perhaps, sir, you don't like the ship?" in-
quired the squire, very angry, as I could see.
"T can't speak as to that, sir, not having seen
her tried," said the captain. 'She seems a clever
craft; more I can't say."
"Possibly, sir, you may not like your em-
ployer, either?" says the squire.
But here Dr. Livesey cut in.
"Stay a bit," said he, "stay a bit. No use of
such questions as that but to produce ill-feeling.
The captain has said too much or he has said
too little, and I'm bound to say that I require
an explanation of his words. You don't, you
say, like this cruise. Now, why?"
"YT was engaged, sir, on what we call sealed
orders, to sail this ship for that gentleman
where he should bid me," said the captain.
"So far so good. But now I find that every man
before the mast knows more than I do. I don't
call that fair, now, do you?"
"No," said Dr. Livesey, "I don't."
"Next," said the captain, "I learn we are go-
ing after treasure-hear it from my own hands,
POWDER AND ARMS 83
mind you. Now, treasure is ticklish work; I
don't like treasure voyages on any account;
and I don't like them, above all, when they are
secret and when (begging your pardon, Mr.
Trelawney) the secret has been told to the
parrot."
"Silver's parrot?" asked the squire.
"It's a way of speaking," said the captain.
"Blabbed, I mean. It's my belief neither of
you gentlemen know what you are about; but
Tl tell you my way of it-life or death, and
a close run."
"That is all clear, and, I daresay, true
enough," replied Dr. Livesey. "We take the
risk; but we are not so ignorant as you believe
us. Next, you say you don't like the crew. Are
they not good seamen?"
"JT don't like them, sir," returned Captain
Smollett. "And I think I should have had the
choosing of my own hands, if you go to that."
"Perhaps you should," replied the doctor.
"My friend should, perhaps, have taken you
along with him; but the slight, if there be one,
was unintentional. And you don't like Mr. Ar-
row?"
"T don't, sir. I believe he's a good seaman;
but he's too free with the crew to be a good
officer. A mate should keep himself to himself
-shouldn't drink with the men before the
mast!"
oO
Or
ib o
84 TREASURE ISLAND
"Do you mean he drinks?" cried the squire.
"No, sir," replied the captain; "only that
he's too familiar."
"Well, now, and the short and long of it,
captain?" asked the doctor. "Tell us what you
want."
"Well, gentlemen, are you determined to go
on this cruise?"
"Like iron," answered the squire.
"Very good," said the captain. "Then, as
you've heard me very patiently, saying things
that I could not prove, hear me a few words
more. They are putting the powder and the
arms in the fore hold. Now, you have a good
place under the cabin; why not put them
there?-first point. Then you are bringing four
of your own people with you, and they tell me
some of them are to be berthed forward. Why
not give them the berths here beside the cabin?
-second point."
"Any more?" asked Mr. Trelawney.
"One more," said the captain. "There's been
too much blabbing already."
"Far too much," agreed the doctor.
"T'll tell you what I've heard myself," con-
tinued Captain Smollett: "that you have a map
of an island; that there's crosses on the map
to show where treasure is; and that the island
lies-" And then he named the latitude and
longitude exactly.
POWDER AND ARMS 85
"T never told that," cried the squire, "to a
soul!"
"The hands know it, sir," returned the cap-
tain.
"Livesey, that must have been you or Haw-
kins," cried the squire.
"Tt doesn't much matter who it was," replied
the doctor. And I could see that neither he nor
the captain paid much regard to Mr. Tre-
lawney's protestations. Neither did I, to be
sure, he was so loose a talker; yet in this case
I believe he was really right, and that nobody
had told the situation of the island.
"Well, gentlemen," continued the captain,
"T don't know who has this map; but I make
it a point, it shall be kept secret even from me
and Mr. Arrow. Otherwise I would ask you to
let me resign."
"T see," said the doctor. "You wish us to
keep this matter dark, and to make a garrison
of the stern part of the ship, manned with my
friend's own people, and provided with all the
arms and powder on board. In other words,
you fear a mutiny."
"Sir," said Captain Smollett, "with no inten-
tion to take offence, I deny your right to put
words into my mouth. No captain, sir, would
be justified in going to sea at all if he had
ground enough to say that. As for Mr. Arrow,
I believe him thoroughly honest; some of the
86 TREASURE ISLAND
men are the same; all may be for what I know.
But I am responsible for the ship's safety and
the life of every man Jack aboard of her. I
see things going, as I think, not quite right.
And I ask you to take certain precautions, or
let me resign my berth. And that's all."
"Captain Smollett," began the doctor, with
a smile, "did ever you hear the fable of the
mountain and the mouse? You'll excuse me, I
10 daresay, but you remind me of that fable.
When you came in here I'll stake my wig you
meant more than this."
"Doctor," said the captain, "you are smart.
When I came in here I meant to get dis-
charged. I had no thought that Mr. Trelawney
would hear a word."
"No more I would," cried the squire. ""Had
Livesey not been here, I should have seen you
to the deuce. As it is, I have heard you. I will
20 do as you desire; but I think the worse of
you."
"That's as you please, sir," said the cap-
tain. "You'll find I do my duty."
And with that he took his leave.
"Trelawney," said the doctor, "contrary to
all my notions, I believe you have managed to
get two honest men on board with you-that
man and John Silver."
"Silver, if you like," cried the squire; "but
30 as for that intolerable humbug, I declare I
ou
iu oO
2 ot
POWDER AND ARMS 87
think his conduct unmanly, unsailorly, and
downright un-English."
"Well," says the doctor, "'we shall see."
nae we came on deck, the men had begun
already to take out the arms and powder, yo-
ho-ing at their work, while the captain and Mr.
Arrow stood by superintending.
The new arrangement was quite to my lik-
ing. The whole schooner had been overhauled;
six berths had been made astern, out of what
had been the after-part of the main hold; and
this set of cabins was only joined to the galley
and forecastle by a sparred passage on the port
side. It had been originally meant that the
captain, Mr. Arrow, Hunter, Joyce, the doctor,
and the squire were to occupy these six berths.
Now, Redruth and I were to get two of them,
and Mr. Arrow and the captain were to sleep
on deck in the companion,° which had been
enlarged on each side till you might almost
have called it a round-house. Very low it
was still, of course; but there was room to
swing two hammocks, and even the mate
seemed pleased with the arrangements. Even
he, perhaps, had been doubtful as to the
crew, but that is only guess; for, as you
shall hear, we had not long the benefit of his
opinion.
We were all hard at work, changing the pow-
der and the berths, when the last man or two,
2 Oo
88 TREASURE ISLAND
and Long John along with them, came off in a
shore-boat.
The cook came up the side like a monkey
for cleverness, and, as soon as he saw what
was doing, "So ho, mates!" says he, "what's
this?"
"We're a-changing of the powder, Jack," an-
swers one.
"Why, by the powers," cried Long John,
"if we do, we'll miss the morning tide!"
"My orders!" said the captain shortly. "You
may go below, my man. Hands will want sup-
"Ay, ay, sir," answered the cook; and,
touching his forelock, he disappeared at once in
the direction of his galley.
"That's a good man, captain," said the doc-
tor.
"Very likely, sir," replied Captain Smollett.
"Easy with that, men-easy," he ran on, to the
fellows who were shifting the powder; and then
suddenly observing me examining the swivel®
we carried amidships, a long brass nine-
"Here, you ship's boy," he cried, "out o' that!
Off with you to the cook and get some work."
And then as I was hurrying off I heard him
say, quite loudly, to the doctor: -
"Tl have no favourites on my ship."
I assure you I was quite of the squire's way
of thinking, and hated the captain deeply.
CHAPTER X
THE VOYAGE
ALL that night we were in a great bustle get-
ting things stowed in their place, and boatfuls
of the squire's friends, Mr. Blandly and the
like, coming off to wish him a good voyage and
a safe return. We never had a night at the
"Admiral Benbow" when I had half the work;
and I was dog-tired when, a little before dawn,
the boatswain sounded his pipe, and the crew
began to man the capstan-bars. I might have
been twice as weary, yet I would not have left
the deck; all was so new and interesting to
me-the brief commands, the shrill note of the
whistle, the men bustling to their places in
the glimmer of the ship's lanterns.
"Now, Barbecue, tip us a stave," cried one
voice.
"The old one," cried another.
"Ay, ay, mates," said Long John, who was
standing by, with his crutch under his arm, and
at once broke out in the air and words I knew
so well-
"Fifteen men on the dead man's chest"-
and then the whole crew bore chorus: -
"Yo-ho-ho, and a bottle of rum!"
oO
per So
1 oO
go TREASURE ISLAND
and at the third "ho!" drove the bars before
them with a will.
Even at that exciting moment it carried me
back to the old "Admiral Benbow" in a sec-
ond; and I seemed to hear the voice of the
captain piping in the chorus. But soon the
anchor was short up; soon it was hanging drip-
ping at the bows; soon the sails began to draw,
and the land and shipping to flit by on either
side; and before I could lie down to snatch an
hour of slumber the Hispaniola had begun her
voyage to the Isle of Treasure.
I am not going to relate that voyage in
detail. It was fairly prosperous. The ship
proved to be a good ship, the crew were
capable seamen, and the captain thoroughly
understood his business. But before we came
the length of Treasure Island, two or three
things had happened which require to be
known.
Mr. Arrow, first of all, turned out even worse
than the captain had feared. He had no com-
mand among the men, and people did what
they pleased with him. But that was by no
means the worst of it; for after a day or two
at sea he began to appear on deck with hazy
eye, red cheeks, stuttering tongue, and other
marks of drunkenness. Time after time he was
ordered below in disgrace. Sometimes he fell
and cut himself; sometimes he lay all day long
THE VOYAGE gI
in his little bunk at one side of the compan-
ion; sometimes for a day-or two he would be
almost sober and attend to his work at least
passably.
In the meantime, we could never make out
where he got the drink. That was the ship's
mystery.° Watch him as we pleased, we could
do nothing to solve it; and when we asked him
to his face, he would only laugh, if he were
drunk, and if he were sober, deny solemnly that -
he ever tasted anything but water.
He was not only useless as an officer, and a
bad influence amongst the men, but it was
plain that at this rate he must soon kill himself
outright; so nobody was much surprised, nor
very sorry, when one dark night, with a head
sea, he disappeared entirely and was seen no
more.
"Overboard!" said the captain. "Well, gen-
tlemen, that saves the trouble of putting him
in irons."
But there we were, without a mate; and it
was necessary, of course, to advance one of the
men. The boatswain, Job Anderson, was the
likeliest man aboard, and, though he kept his
old title, he served in a way as mate. Mr. Tre-
lawney had followed the sea, and his knowl-
edge made him very useful, for he often took
a watch himself in easy weather. And the cox-
swain, Israel Hands, was a careful, wily, old,
al
ol
o
OU
o
ol
92 TREASURE ISLAND
experienced seaman, who could be trusted at
a pinch with almost anything.
He was a great confidant of Long John Sil-
ver, 'and so the mention of his name leads me
on to speak of our ship's cook, Barbecue, as
the men called him.
Aboard ship he carried his crutch by a lan-
yard°® round his neck, to have both hands as
free as possible. It was something to see him
wedge the foot of the crutch against a bulk-
head,° and, propped against it, yielding to
every movement of the ship, get on with his
cooking like someone safe ashore. Still more
strange was it to see him in the heaviest of
weather cross the deck. He had a line or two
rigged up to help him across the widest spaces
-Long John's earrings, they were called; and
he would hand himself from one 'place to an-
other, now using the crutch, now trailing it
alongside by the lanyard, as quickly as another
man could walk. Yet some of the men who had
sailed with him before expressed their pity to
see him so reduced.
"He's no common man, Barbecue," said the
coxswain to me. "He had good schooling in his
young days, and can speak like a book when
so minded; and brave-a lion's nothing along-
side of Long John! I seen him grapple four,
and knock their heads together-him un-
30 armed."
THE VOYAGE 93
All the crew respected and even obeyed him.
He had a way of talking to each, and doing
everybody some particular service. To me he
was unweariedly kind; and always glad to see
me in the galley, which he kept as clean as a
new pin; the dishes hanging up burnished, and
his parrot in a cage in one corner.
"Come away, Hawkins,' he would say;
' "come and have a yarn with John. Nobody
more welcome than yourself, my son. Sit you
down and hear the news. Here's Cap'n Flint-
I calls my parrot Cap'n Flint, after the famous
buccaneer-here's Cap'n Flint predicting suc-
cess to our v'yage. Wasn't you, cap'n?"
And the parrot would say, with great rapid-
ity, 'Pieces of eight! pieces of eight! pieces of
eight!" till you wondered that it was not out
of breath, or till John threw his handkerchief
over the cage.
"Now, that bird,'"' he would say, "is, maybe,
two hundred years old, Hawkins-they lives
for ever mostly; and if anybody's seen more
wickedness, it must be the devil himself. She's
sailed with England,° the great Cap'n Eng-
land, the pirate. She's been at Madagascar,°
and at Malabar,° and Surinam,° and Provi-
dence,° and Portobello.° She was at the fishing
up of the wrecked plate ships. It's there she
learned 'Pieces of eight,' and little wonder;
three hundred and fifty thousand of 'em, Haw-
nO
'04 TREASURE ISLAND
kins! She was at the boarding of the Viceroy
of the Indies out of Goa,° she was; and to look
at her you would think she was a babby. But
you smelt powder-didn't you, cap'n?"
"Stand by to go about," the parrot would
scream.
"Ah, she's a handsome craft, she is," the
cook would say, and give her sugar from his
pocket, and then the bird would peck at the
bars and swear straight on, passing belief for
wickedness. ''There," John would add, ''you
can't touch pitch and not be mucked, lad.
Here's this poor old innocent bird o' mine
swearing blue fire, and none the wiser, you may
lay to that. She would swear the same, in a
manner of speaking, before chaplain." And
John would touch his forelock with a solemn
way he had, that made me think he was the
best of men.
In the meantime, squire and Captain Smol-
lett were still on pretty distant terms with one
another. The squire made no bones about the
matter; he despised the captain. The captain,
on his part, never spoke but when he was spo-
ken to, and then sharp and short and dry, and
not a word wasted. He owned, when driven in-
to a corner, that he seemed to have been wrong
about the crew, that some of them were as
brisk as he wanted to see, and all had behaved
fairly well. As for the ship, he had taken a
THE VOYAGE 95
downright fancy to her. "She'll lie a point
nearer the wind than a man has a right to ex-
pect of his own married wife, sir. But,' he
would add, "all I say is we're not home again,
and I don't like the cruise."
The squire, at this, would turn away and
march up and down the deck, chin in air.
"A trifle more of that man," he would say,
"and I shall explode."
We had some heavy weather, which only
proved the qualities of the Hispaniola. Every
man on board seemed well content, and they
must have been hard to please if they had
been otherwise; for it is my belief there was
never a ship's company so spoiled since Noah
put to sea. Double grog was going on the least
excuse; there was duff° on odd days, as, for
instance, if the squire heard it was any man's
birthday; and always a barrel of apples stand-
ing broached® in the waist,° for anyone to help
himself that had a fancy.
"Never knew good come of it yet," the cap-
tain said to Dr. Livesey. "Spoil foc's'le hands,
make devils. That's my belief."
But good did come of the apple barrel, as
you shall hear; for if it had not been for that,
we should have had no note of warning, and
might all have perished by the hand of treach-
ery.
This was how it came about.
oO
il oO
a ot
96 TREASURE ISLAND
We had run up the trades® to get the wind
of the island we were after-I am not allowed
to be more plain-and now we were running
down for it with a bright look-out day and
night. It was about the last day of our outward
voyage, by the largest computation; some time
that night, or; at latest, before noon of the
morrow, we should sight the Treasure Island.
We were heading S.S.W., and had a steady
breeze abeam and a quiet sea. The Hispaniola
rolled steadily, dipping her bowsprit now and
then with a whiff of spray. All was drawing
alow and aloft; everyone was in the bravest
spirits, because we were now so near an end of
the first part of our adventure.
Now, just after sundown, when all my work
was over, and I was on my way to my berth,
it occurred to me that I should like an apple.
I ran on deck. The watch was all forward look-
ing out for the island. The man at the helm was
watching the luff of the sail, and whistling
away gently to himself; and that was the only
sound excepting the swish of the sea against
the bows and around the:sides of the ship.
In I got bodily into the apple barrel, and
found there was scarce an apple left; but, sit-
ting down there in the dark, what with the
sound of the waters and the rocking movement
of the ship, I had either fallen asleep, or was
on the point of doing so, when a heavy man sat
THE VOYAGE 97
down with rather a clash close by. The barrel
shook as he leaned his shoulders against it, and
I was just about to jump up when the man
began to speak. It was Silver's voice, and, be-
fore I had heard a dozen words, I would not »
have shown myself for all the world, but lay
there, trembling and listening, in the extreme
of fear and curiosity; for from these dozen
words I understood that the lives of all the
honest men aboard depended upon me alone. 1°
or
ol
CHAPTER XI
Wuat I Hearp IN THE APPLE BARREL
'No, not I," said Silver. "Flint was cap'n;
I was quartermaster, along of my timber leg.
The same broadside°® I lost my leg, old Pew
lost his dead-lights. It was a master surgeon,
him that ampytated me-out of college and all
-Latin by the bucket, and what not; but he
was hanged like a dog, and sun-dried like the
rest, at Corso Castle. That was Roberts'°® men,
that was, and comed of changing names to their
ships-Rovyal Fortune and so on. Now, what a
ship was christened, so let her stay, I says.
So it was with the Cassandra, as brought us all
safe home from Malabar, after England took
the Viceroy of the Indies; so it was with the old
Walrus, Flint's old ship, as I've seen a-muck
with the red blood and fit to sink with gold."
"Ah!" cried another voice, that of the young-
est hand on board, and evidently full of admi-
ration, "he was the flower of the flock, was
Flint!"
"Davis® was a man, too, by all accounts,"
said Silver. "I never sailed along of him; first
with England, then with Flint, that's my story;
and now here on my own account, in a manner
of speaking. I laid by nine hundred safe, from
England, and two thousand after Flint. That
Wuat I HEARD IN THE APPLE BARREL 99
ain't bad for a man before the mast-all safe
in bank. 'Tain't earning now, it's saving does
it, you may lay to that. Where's all England's
men now? I dunno. Where's Flint's? Why, most
on 'em aboard here, and glad to get the duff-
been begging before that, some on 'em. Old
Pew, as had lost his sight, and might have
thought shame, spends twelve hundred pounds
in a year, like a lord in Parliament. Where is
he now? Well, he's dead now and under
hatches; but for two year before that, shiver
my timbers! the man was starving. He begged,
and he stole, and he cut throats, and starved
at that, by the powers!"
"Well, it ain't much use, after all," said the
young seaman.
"*Tain't much use for fools, you may lay to
it-that, nor nothing," cried Silver. "But now,
you look here: you're young, you are, but
you're as smart as paint. I see that when I set
my eyes on you, and I'll talk to you like a
man."
You may imagine how I felt when I heard
this abominable old rogue addressing another
in the very same words of flattery as he had
used to myself. I think, if I had been able, that
I would have killed him through the barrel.
Meantime, he ran on, little supposing he was
overheard.
"Here it is about gentlemen of fortune. They ;
on
oO
il =)
EOO TREASURE ISLAND
lives rough, and they risk swinging, but they
eat and drink like fighting-cocks, and when a
cruise is done, why, it's hundreds of pounds
instead of hundreds of farthings in their pock-
ets. Now, the most goes for rum and a good
fling, and to sea again in their shirts. But that's
not the course I lay. I puts it all away, some
here, some there, and none too much any-
wheres, by reason of suspicion. I'm fifty, mark
you; once back from this cruise, I set up gentle-
man in earnest. Time enough, too, says you.
Ah, but I've lived easy in the meantime; never
denied myself o' nothing heart desires, and
slep' soft and ate dainty all my days, but when
at sea. And how did I begin? Before the mast,
like you!"
"Well," said the other, "but all the other
money's gone now, ain't it? You daren't show
face in Bristol after this."
"Why, where might you suppose it was?"
asked Silver, derisively.
"At Bristol, in banks and places," answered
his companion.
"It were," said the cook; "it were when we
weighed anchor. But my old mi§sis has it all
by now. And the 'Spyglass' is sold, lease and
goodwill and rigging; and the old girl's off to
meet me. I would tell you where, for I trust
you; but it 'ud make jealousy among the
-mates."'
i]
WuatT I HeEArRD IN THE APPLE BARREL IOI
"And can you trust your missis?"' asked the
other.
"Gentlemen of fortune," returned the cook,
"usually trusts little among themselves, and
right they are, you may lay to it. But I have
a way with me, I have. When a mate brings a
slip on his cable-one as knows me, I mean-
it won't be in the same world with old John.
There was some that was feared of Pew, and
some that was feared of Flint; but Flint his
own self was feared of me. Feared he was, and
proud. They was the roughest crew afloat, was
Flint's; the devil himself would have been
feared to go to sea with them. Well, now, I tell
you, I'm not a boasting man, and you seen
yourself how easy I keep company; but when
I was quartermaster, /ambs wasn't the word
for Flint's old buccaneers. Ah, you may be sure
of yourself in old John's ship."
"Well, I tell you now," replied the lad, "I
didn't half a quarter like the job till I had this
talk with you, John; but there's my hand on
it now."
"And a brave lad you were, and smart, too,"
answered Silver, shaking hands so heartily that
all the barrel shook, '"'and a finer figurehead for
a gentleman of fortune I never clapped my eyes
on."
By this time I had begun to understand the
meaning of their terms. By a "gentleman of
d
or
ray 0
tb 0
Or
102 TREASURE ISLAND
fortune" they plainly meant neither more nor
less than a common pirate, and the little scene
that I had overheard was the last act in the
corruption of one of the honest hands-perhaps
of the last one left aboard. But on this point I
was soon to be relieved, for Silver giving a little
whistle, a third man strolled up and sat down
by the party.
"Dick's square," said Silver.
"Oh, I know'd Dick was square," returned
the voice of the coxswain, Israel Hands. "He's
no fool, is Dick." And he turned his quid and
spat. "But, look here," he went on, "here's
what I want to know, Barbecue: how long are
we a-going to stand off and on like a blessed
bumboat? I've had a'most enough o' Cap'n
Smollett; he's hazed me long enough by thun-
der! I want to go into that cabin, I do. I want
their pickles and wines, and that."
"Tsrael," said Silver, "your head ain't much
account, nor ever was. But youw're able to hear,
I reckon; leastways, your ears is big enough.
Now, here's what I say: you'll berth forward,
and you'll live hard, and you'll speak soft, and
you'll keep sober, till I give the word; and
you may lay to that, my son."
"Well, I don't say no, do I?" growled the
coxswain. "What I say is, when? That's what
lesay
"When! by the powers!" cried Silver. "Well,
Wuat I HEarD IN THE APPLE BARREL 103
now, if you want to know, I'll tell you when.
The last moment I can manage; and that's
when. Here's a first-rate seaman, Cap'n Smol-
lett, sails the blessed ship for us. Here's this
squire and doctor with a map and such-I don't
know where it is, do I? No more do you, says
you. Well, then, I mean this squire and doctor
shall find the stuff, and help us to get it aboard,
by the powers! Then we'll see. If I was sure of
you all, sons of double Dutchmen, I'd have
Cap'n Smollett navigate us half-way back again
before I struck."
"Why, we're all seamen aboard here, I
should think," said the lad Dick.
"We're all foc's'le hands, you mean,"
snapped Silver. "We can steer a course, but
who's to set one? That's what all you gentle-
men split on, first and last. If I had my way,
I'd have Cap'n Smollett work us back into the
trades at least; then we'd have no blessed mis-
calculations and a spoonful of water a day. But
I know the sort you are. I'll finish with 'em
at the island, as soon's the blunt's on board,
and a pity it is. But you're never happy till
you're drunk. Split my sides, I've a sick heart
to sail with the likes of you!"
"Easy all, Long John," cried Israel. "Who's
a-crossin' of you?"
"Why, how many tall ships, think ye, now,
have I seen laid aboard? and how many brisk
on
i) i)
104 TREASURE ISLAND
lads drying in the sun at Execution Dock®?"'
cried Silver, "and all for this same hurry and
hurry and hurry. You hear me? I seen a thing
or two at sea, I have. If you would on'y lay
your course, and a p'int to windward, you would
ride in carriages, you would. But not you!
I know you. You'll have your mouthful of rum
tomorrow, and go hang."
"Everybody know'd you was a kind of a
chapling, John; but there's others as could
hand ,and steer as well as you," said Israel.
"They liked a bit o' fun, they did. They wasn't
so high and dry, nohow, but took their fling,
like jolly companions every one."
"So?" says Silver. "Well, and where are they
now? Pew was that sort, and he died a beggar-
man. Flint was, and he died of rum at Savan-
nah. Ah, they was a sweet crew, they was! on'y,
where are they?"
"But," asked Dick, "when we do lay 'em
athwart, what are we to do with 'em, anyhow?"
"There's the man for me!" cried the cook,
admiringly. '"That's what I call business. Well,
what would you think? Put 'em ashore like ma-
roons? That would have been England's way.
Or cut 'em down like that much pork? That
would have been Flint's or Billy Bones's."
"Billy was the man for that," said Israel.
""Dead men don't bite,' says he. Well, he's
dead now hisself; he knows the long and short
Wuat I HEARD IN THE APPLE BARREL 105
on it now; and if ever a rough hand come to
port, it was Billy."
"Right you are,' said Silver, "rough and
ready. But mark you here: I'm an easy man-
I'm quite the gentleman, says you; but this
time it's serious. Dooty is dooty, mates. I give
my vote-death. When I'm in Parlyment, and
riding in my coach, I don't want none of these
sea-lawyers in the cabin a-coming home, un-
looked for, like the devil at prayers. Wait is
what I say; but when the time comes, why let
her rip!"
"John," cries the coxswain, ''you're a man!"
"You'll say so, Israel, when you see," said
Silver. "Only one thing I claim-I claim Tre-
lawney. I'll wring his calf's head off his body
with these hands. Dick!'' he added, breaking
off, "you just jump up, like a sweet lad, and
get me an apple, to wet my pipe like."
You may fancy the terror I was in! I should
have leaped out and run for it, if I had found
the strength; but my limbs and heart alike mis-
gave me. I heard Dick begin to rise, and then
someone seemingly stopped him, and the voice
of Hands exclaimed:-
"Oh, stow that! Don't you get sucking of
that bilge, John. Let's have a go of the rum."
"Dick," said Silver, "I trust you. I've a
gauge on the keg, mind. There's the key; you
fill a pannikin and bring it up."
or
106 TREASURE ISLAND
Terrified as I was, I could not help thinking
to myself that this must have been how Mr.
Arrow got the strong waters that destroyed him.
Dick was gone but a little while, and during
his absence Israel spoke straight on in the
cook's ear. It was but a word or two that I
could catch, and yet I gathered some important
news; for, besides other scraps that tended to
the same purpose, this whole clause was au-
dible: '"Not another man of them'II jine." Hence
there were still faithful men on board.
When Dick returned, one after another of
the trio took the pannikin and drank-one "To
luck"; another with a "Here's to old Flint";
and Silver himself saying, in a kind of song,
"Here's to ourselves, and hold your luff,°
plenty of prizes and plenty of duff."
Just then a sort of brightness fell upon me
in the barrel, and, looking up, I found the moon
had risen, and was silvering the mizzen-top and
shining white on the luff of the fore-sail; and
almost at the same time the voice of the look-
out shouted, 'Land ho!"
CHAPTER XII
CouNCIL OF WAR
THERE was a great rush of feet across the
deck. I could hear people tumbling up from the
cabin and the foc's'le; and, slipping in an
instant outside my barrel, I dived behind the
fore-sail, made a double towards the stern, and
came out upon the open deck in time to join
Hunter and Dr. Livesey in the rush for the
weather bow.
There all hands were already congregated. A
belt of fog had lifted almost simultaneously
with the appearance of the moon. Away to the
south-west of us we saw two low hills, about a
couple of miles apart, and rising behind one of
them a third and higher hill, whose peak was
still buried in the fog. All three seemed sharp
and conical in figure.
So much I saw, almost in a dream, for I had
not yet recovered from my horrid fear of a
minute or two before. And then I heard the
voice of Captain Smollett issuing orders. The
Hispaniola was laid a couple of points nearer
the wind, and now sailed a course that would
just clear the island on the east.
"And now, men," said the captain, when all
or
i ol
108 TREASURE ISLAND
was sheeted home, "has any one of you ever
seen that land ahead?"
"T have, sir," said Silver. "I've watered there
with a trader I was cook in."
"The anchorage is on the south, behind an
islet, I fancy?" asked the captain.
"Ves, sir; Skeleton Island they calls it. It
were a main place for pirates once, and a hand
we had on board knowed all'their names for it.
That hill to the nor'ard they calls the Fore-
mast Hill, there are three hills in a row run-
ning south'ard-fore, main, and mizzen, sir.
But the main-that's the big 'un with the cloud
on it-they usually calls the Spyglass, by
5 reason of a look-out they kept when they was
in the anchorage cleaning; for it's there they
cleaned their ships, sir, asking your pardon."
"T have a chart here," says Captain Smollett.
"See if that's the place."
Long John's eyes burned in his head as he
took the chart; but, by the fresh look of the
paper, I knew he was doomed to disappoint-
ment. This was not the map we found in Billy
Bones's chest, but an accurate copy, complete
in all things-names and heights and soundings
-with the single exception of the red crosses
and the written notes. Sharp as must have been
his annoyance, Silver had the strength of mind
to hide it.
"Yes, sir," said he, "this is the spot, to be
CoUNCIL OF WaR 109
sure; and very prettily drawed out. Who might
have done that, I wonder? The pirates were too
ignorant, I reckon. Ay, here it is: 'Capt. Kidd's
Anchorage'°-just the name my _ shipmate
called it. There's a strong current runs along
the south, and then away nor'ard up the west
coast. Right you was, sir," says he, "to haul
your wind and keep the weather of the island.
Leastways, if such was your .intention as to
enter and careen,° and there ain't no better
place for that in these waters."
"Thank you, my man," says Captain Smol-
lett. "Tl ask you, later on, to give us a help.
You may go."
I was surprised at the coolness with which
John avowed his knowledge of the island; and
I own I was half-frightened when I saw him
drawing nearer to myself. He did not know, to
be sure, that I had overheard his council from
the apple barrel, and yet I had, by this time,
taken such a horror of his cruelty, duplicity,
and power, that I could scarce conceal a shud-
der when he laid his hand upon my arm.
"Ah," says he, "this here is a sweet spot, this
island-a sweet spot for a lad to get ashore on.
You'll bathe, and you'll climb trees, and you'll
hunt goats, you will; and you'll get aloft on
them hills like a goat yourself. Why, .it makes
me young again. I was going to forget my tim-
ber leg, I was. It's a pleasant thing to be young, :
ot
oO
at oO
or 1
I1O TREASURE ISLAND
and have ten toes, and you may lay to that.
When you want to go a bit of exploring, you
just ask old John, and he'll put up a snack for
you to take along."
And clapping me in the friendliest way upon
the shoulder, he hobbled off forward, and went
below.
Captain Smollett, the squire, and Dr. Livesey
were talking together on the quarter-deck, and,
anxious as I was to tell them my story, I durst
not interrupt them openly. While I was still
casting about in my thoughts to find some
probable excuse, Dr. Livesey called me to his
side. He had left his pipe below, and being a
slave to tobacco, had meant that I should fetch
it; but as soon as I was near enough to speak
and not to be overheard, I broke out imme-
diately: -"Doctor, let me speak. Get the cap-
tain and squire down to the cabin, and then
make some pretence to send for me. I have
terrible news."
The doctor changed countenance a little, but
next moment he was master of himself.
"Thank you, Jim," said he, quite loudly,
"that was all I wanted to know," as if he had
asked me a question.
And with that he turned on his heel and re-
joined the other two. They spoke together for a
little, and though none of them started, or
raised his voice, or so much as whistled, it was
CoUNCIL OF WAR 5
plain enough that Dr. Livesey had commu-
nicated my request; for the next thing that I
heard was the captain giving an order to Job
Anderson, and all hands were piped on deck.
"My lads," said Captain Smollett, "I've a
word to say to you. This land that we have
sighted is the place we have been sailing for.
Mr. Trelawney, being a very open-handed
gentleman, as we ali know, has just asked me a
word or two, and as I was able to tell him that
every man on board had done his duty, alow
and aloft, as I never ask to see it done better,
why, he and I and the doctor are going below
to the cabin to drink your health and luck, and
youll have grog served out for you to drink
our health and luck. Ill tell you what I think
of this: I think it handsome. And if you think
as I do, you'll give a good sea cheer for the
gentleman that does it."
The cheer followed-that was a matter of
course; but it rang out so full and hearty, that
I confess I could hardly believe these same men
were plotting for our blood.
"One more cheer for Cap'n Smollett," cried
Long John, when the first had subsided.
And this also was given with a will.
On the top of that the three gentlemen went
below, and not long after, word was sent for-
ward that Jim Hawkins was wanted in the
cabin.
ai
I12 TREASURE ISLAND
I found them all three seated round the table,
a bottle of Spanish wine and some raisins be-
fore them, and the doctor smoking away, with
his wig on his lap, and that, I knew, was a
sign that he was agitated.° The stern window
was open, for it was a warm night, and you
could see the moon shining behind on the ship's
wake.
"Now, Hawkins," said the squire, "you have
something to say. Speak up."
I did as I was bid, and, as short as I could
make.it, told the whole details of Silver's con-
versation. Nobody interrupted me till I was
done, nor did any one of the three of them make
15 so much as a movement, but they kept their
eyes upon my face from first to last.
"Jim," said Dr. Livesey, "take a seat."
And they made me sit down at table beside
them, poured me out a glass of wine, filled my
20 hands with raisins, and all three, one after the
other, and each with a bow, drank my good
health, and their service to me, for my luck and
courage.
"Now, captain," said the squire, "you were
right, and I was wrong. I own myself an ass,
and { await your orders."
"No more an ass than I, sir,"' returned the
captain. "I never heard of a crew that meant to
mutiny but what showed signs before, for any
30 man that had an eye in his head to see the
or
1 So
2 oO
CouNCcIL OF WAR 113
mischief and take steps according. But this
crew," he added, "'beats me."
"Captain," said the doctor, "with your
permission, that's Silver. A very remarkable
man."
"He'd look remarkably well from a yard-
arm, sir," returned the captain. "But this is
talk; this don't lead to anything. I see three or
four points, and with Mr. Trelawney's permis-
sion, ['ll name them."
"You, sir, are the captain. It is for you to
speak," says Mr. Trelawney, grandly.
"First point,' began Mr. Smollett. "We must
go on, because we can't turn back. If I gave
the word to go about, they would rise at once.
Second point, we have time before us-at least,
until this treasure's found. Third point, there
are faithful hands. Now, sir, it's got to come to
blows sooner or later; and what I propose is,
to take time by the forelock, as the saying is,
and come to blows some fine day when they
least expect it. We can count, I take it, on your
own home servants, Mr. Trelawney?"'
"As upon myself," declared the squire.
"Three," reckoned the captain, "ourselves
make seven, counting Hawkins, here. Now,
about the honest hands?"
"Most likely Trelawney's own men," said the
doctor; ''those he had picked up for himself,
before he lit on Silver."
or
114 TREASURE ISLAND
ee replied the squire. "Hands was one
of mine."
"T did think I could have ee Hands,"
added the captain.
"And to think that they're all ERecHnent a
broke out the squire. "Sir, I could find it in my
heart to blow the ship up."
"Well, gentlemen," said the captain, "the
best that I can say is not much. We must lay
to, if you please, and keep a bright look-out.
It's trying on a man, I know. It would be
pleasanter to come to blows. But there's no help
for it till we know our men. Lay to, and whistle
for a wind, that's my view."
"Jim here," said the doctor, 'can help us
more than anyone. The men are not shy with
him, and Jim is a noticing lad."
"Hawkins, I put prodigious faith in you,"
added the squire.
I began to feel pretty desperate at this, for
I felt altogether helpless; and yet, by an odd
train of circumstances, it was indeed through
me that safety came. In the meantime, talk as
we pleased, there were only seven out of the
twenty-six on whom we knew we could rely;
and out of these seven one was a boy, so that
the grown men on our side were six to their
nineteen.
PARRY til
MY SHORE ADVENTURE
CHAPTER XIII
How My SHorE ADVENTURE BEGAN
THE appearance of the island when I. came
on deck next morning was altogether changed.
Although the breeze had now utterly ceased,
we had made a great deal of way during the
night, and were now lying becalmed about half
a mile to the south-east of the low eastern coast.
Grey-coloured woods covered a large part of
the surface. This even tint was indeed broken
up by streaks of yellow sandbreak in the lower
lands, and by many tall trees of the pine family,
out-topping the others-some singly, some in
clumps; but the general colouring was uniform
and sad. The hills ran up clear above the
vegetation in spires of naked rock. All were
strangely shaped, and the Spyglass, which was
by three or four hundred feet the tallest on the
island, was likewise the strangest in configura-
tion, running up sheer from almost every side,
and then suddenly cut off at the top like a
pedestal to put a statue on.
The Hispaniola was rolling scuppers® under
in the ocean swell. The booms were tearing at
the blocks, the rudder was banging to and
oO
Or
118 TREASURE ISLAND
fro, and the whole ship creaking, groaning, and
jumping like a manufactory. I had to cling tight
to the backstay, and the world turned giddily
before my eyes; for though I was a good
enough sailor when there was way on, this
standing still and being rolled about like a bot-
tle was a thing I never learned to stand without
a qualm or so, above all in the morning, on an
empty stomach.
Perhaps it was thishenarhane it was the look
of the island, with its grey, melancholy woods,
and wild stone spires, and the surf that we
could both see and hear foaming and thunder-
ing on the steep beach-at least, although the
sun shone bright and hot, and the shore birds
were fishing and crying all around us, and you
would have thought anyone would have been
glad to get to land after being so long at sea,
my heart sank, as the saying is, into my boots;
and from that first look onward, I hated the
very thought of Treasure Island.
We had a dreary morning's work before us,
for there was no sign of any wind, and the
boats had to be got out and manned, and the
ship warped° three or four miles round the
corner of the island, and up the narrow pas-
sage to the haven behind Skeleton Island. I
volunteered for one of the boats, where I had,
of course, no business. The heat was sweltering,
and the men grumbled fiercely over their work.
How My Suore ADVENTURE BEGAN 119
Anderson was in command of my boat, and
instead of keeping the crew in order, he grum-
bled as loud as the worst.
"Well," he said, with an oath, "it's not for
ever."
I thought this was a very bad sign; for, up
to that day, the men had gone briskly and wil-
lingly about their business; but the very sight
of the island had relaxed the cords of discipline.
All the way in, Long John stood by the
steersman and conned® the ship. He knew the
passage like the palm of his hand; and though
the man in the chains® got everywhere more
water than was down in the chart, John never
hesitated once.
"There's a strong scour with the ebb," he
said, 'and this here passage has been dug out,
in a,manner of speaking, with a spade."
We brought up just where the anchor was in
the chart, about a third of a mile from each
shore, the mainland on one side, and Skeleton
Island on the other. The bottom was clean sand.
The plunge of our anchor sent up clouds of
birds wheeling and crying over the woods; but
in less than a minute they were down again,
and all was once more silent.
The place was entirely land-locked, buried
in woods, the trees coming right down to high-
water mark, the shores mostly flat, and the
hilltops standing round at a distance in a sort
il
Or
So
oO
or
"120 TREASURE ISLAND
of amphitheatre, one here, one there. Two little
rivers, or, rather, two swamps, emptied out
into this pond, as you might call it; and the
foliage round that part of the shore had a kind
of poisonous brightness. From the ship, we
could see nothing of the house or stockade, for
they were quite buried among trees; and if it
had not been for the chart on the companion,
we might have been the first that had ever
anchored there since the island arose out of the
seas.
There was not a breath of air moving, nor a
sound but that of the surf booming half a mile
away along the beaches and against the rocks
outside. A peculiar stagnant smell hung over
the anchorage-a smell of sodden leaves
and rotting tree trunks. I observed the doctor
sniffing and sniffing, like someone tasting a
bad egg.
"T don't know about treasure," he said, "but
I'll stake my wig there's fever here."
If the conduct of the men had been alarming
in the boat, it became truly threatening when
they had come aboard. They lay about the deck
growling together in talk. The slightest order
was received with a black look, and grudgingly
and carelessly obeyed. Even the honest hands
must have caught the infection, for there was
not one man aboard to mend another. Mutiny,
30 it was plain, hung over us like a thunder-cloud.
SS
cz
| Qo i) Pd 2 Z < 3
Lonc JoHN GoInc From Group To GROUP
How My SwHore ADVENTURE BEGAN 123
And it was not only we of the cabin party
who perceived the danger. Long John was hard
at work going from group to group, spending
himself in good advice, and as for example no
man could have shown a better. He fairly out-
stripped himself in willingness and civility; he
was all smiles to everyone. If an order were
given, John would be on his crutch in an in-
stant, with the cheeriest "Ay, ay, sir!" in the
world; and when there was nothing else to do,
he kept up one song after another, as if to con-
ceal the discontent of the rest.
Of all the gloomy features of that gloomy
afternoon, this obvious anxiety on the part of
Long John appeared the worst.
We held a council in the cabin.
"Sir," said the captain, "if I risk another
order the whole ship'll come about our ears by
the run. You see, sir, here it is. I get a rough
answer, do I not? Well, if I speak back, pikes
will be going in two shakes; if I don't, Silver
will see there's something under that, and the
game's up. Now, we've only one man to rely
on."
"And who is that?" asked the squire.
"Silver, sir," returned the captain; "he's as
anxious as you and I to smother things up.
This is a tiff; he'd soon talk 'em out of it if he
had the chance, and what I propose to do is to
give him the chance. Let's allow the men an
124 TREASURE ISLAND
afternoon ashore. If they all go, why, we'll fight
the ship. If they none of them go, well, then,
we hold the cabin, and God defend the right.
If some go, you mark my words, sir, Silver'll
bring 'em aboard again as mild as lambs."
It was so decided; loaded pistols were served
out to all the sure men; Hunter, Joyce, and
Redruth were taken into our confidence, and
received the news with less surprise and a bet-
ter spirit than we had looked for, and then the
captain went on deck and addressed the crew.
"My lads," said he, '"'we've had a hot day, and
are all tired and out of sorts. A turn ashore'll
hurt nobody-the boats are still in the water;
15 you can take the gigs,° and as many as please
may go ashore for the afternoon. I'll fire a gun
half an hour before sundown."
I believe the silly fellows must have thought
they would break their shins over treasure as
soon as they were landed; for they all came out
of their sulks in a moment, and gave a cheer
that started the echo in a far-away hill, and
sent the birds once more flying and squalling
round the anchorage.
The captain was too bright to be in the way.
He whipped out of sight in a moment, leaving
Silver to arrange the party; and I fancy it was
as well he did so. Had he been on deck, he
could no longer so much as have pretended not
30 to understand the situation. It was as plain as
OV
al Oo
2 or
How My SHore ADVENTURE BEGAN' 125
'day. Silver was the captain, and a mighty rebel-
lious crew he had of it. The honest hands-and
I was soon to see it proved that there were such
on board-must have been very stupid fellows.
Or, rather, I suppose the truth was this, that all
hands were disaffected° by the example of the
ringleaders-only some more, some less; and a
few, being good fellows in the main, could
neither be led nor driven any further. It is one
thing to be idle and skulk, and quite another
to take a ship and murder a number of innocent
men.
At last, however, the party was made up. Six
fellows were to stay on board, and the remain-
ing thirteen, including Silver, began to embark.
Then it was that there came into my head the
first of the mad notions that contributed so
much to save our lives. If six men were left by
Silver, it was plain our party could not take and
fight the ship; and since only six were left, it
was equally plain that the cabin party had no
present need of my assistance. It occurred to
me at once to go ashore. In a jiffy I had slipped
over the side, and curled up in the foresheets of
the nearest boat, and almost at the same mo-
ment she shoved off.
No one took notice of me, only the bow oar
saying, "Is that you, Jim? Keep your head
down." But Silver, from the other boat, looked
sharply over and called out to know if that
or
oO
o
126 TREASURE ISLAND
were me; and from that moment I began to
regret what I had done.
The crews raced for the beach; but the boat
I was in, having some start, and being at once
the lighter and the better manned, shot far
ahead of her consort, and the bow had struck
among the shore-side trees, and I had caught a
branch and swung myself out, and plunged into
the nearest thicket, while Silver and the rest
were still a hundred yards behind.
"Jim, Jim!" I heard him shouting.
But you may suppose I paid no heed; jump-
ing, ducking and breaking through, I ran
straight before my nose, till I could run no
15 longer.
CHAPTER XIV
Tue First BLow
I was so pleased at having given the slip to
Long John, that I began to enjoy myself and
look around me with some interest on the
strange land that I was in.
I had crossed a marshy tract full of willows,
bulrushes, and odd, outlandish, swampy trees;
and I had now come out upon the skirts of an
open piece of undulating, sandy country, about
a mile long, dotted with a few pines, and a great
number of contorted trees, not unlike the oak in
growth, but pale in the foliage, like willows.
On the far side of the open stood one of the
hills, with two quaint, craggy peaks, shining
vividly in the sun.
I now felt for the first time the joy of ex-
ploration. The isle was uninhabited; my ship-
mates I had left behind, and nothing lived in
front of me but dumb brutes and fowls. I
turned hither and thither among the trees. Here
and there were flowering plants, unknown to
me; here and there I saw snakes, and one
raised his head from a ledge of rock and hissed
at me with a noise not unlike the spinning of a
top. Little did I suppose that he was a deadly
OO
or
al o
oO it
128 TREASURE ISLAND
enemy, and that the noise was the famous
rattle. i
Then I came to a long thicket of these oak-
like trees-live, or evergreen, oaks, I heard
afterwards they should be called-which grew
low along the sand like brambles, the boughs
curiously twisted, the foliage compact, like
thatch. The thicket stretched down from the
top of one of the sandy knolls, spreading and
growing taller as it went, until it reached the
margin of the broad, reedy fen, through which
the nearest of the little rivers soaked its way
into the anchorage. The marsh was steaming
in the strong sun, and the outline of the Spy-
glass trembled through the haze.
All at once there began to go a sort of bustle
among the bulrushes; a wild duck flew up with
a quack, another followed, and soon over the
whole surface of the marsh a great cloud of
birds hung screaming and circling in the air.
I judged at once that some of my shipmates
must be drawing near along the borders of the
fen. Nor was I deceived; for soon I heard the
very distant and low tones of a human voice,
which, as I continued to give ear, grew steadily
louder and nearer.
This put me in a great fear, and I crawled
under cover of the nearest live-oak, and
squatted there, hearkening, as silent as a
mouse.
THE First BLow 129
Another voice answered; and then the first
voice, which I now recognised to be Silver's,
once more took up the story, and ran on for a
long while in a stream, only now and again
interrupted by the other. By the sound they
must have been talking earnestly, and almost
fiercely; but no distinct word came to my hear-
ing.
At last the speakers seemed to have paused,
and perhaps to have sat down; for not only did
they cease to draw any nearer, but the birds
themselves began to grow more quiet, and to
settle again to their places in the swamp.
And now I began to feel that I was neglect-
ing my business, that since I had been so fool-
hardy as to come ashore with these desper-
adoes, the least I could do was to overhear
them at their councils; and that my plain and
obvious duty was to draw as close as I could
manage, under the favourable ambush of the
crouching trees.
I could tell the direction of the speakers
pretty exactly, not only by the sound of their
voices, but by the behaviour of the few birds
that still hung in alarm above the heads of the
intruders.
Crawling on all-fours, I made steadily but
slowly towards them; till at last, raising my
head to an aperture among the leaves, I could
see clear down into a little green dell beside the
ot
1 So
1 oO
i) mas
130 TREASURE ISLAND
marsh, and closely set about with trees, where
Long John Silver and another of the crew stood
face to face in conversation.
The sun beat full upon them. Silver had
thrown his hat beside him on the ground, and
his great, smooth, blond face, all shining with
heat, was lifted to the other man's in a kind of
appeal.
"Mate," he was saying, ''it's because I thinks
gold dust of you-gold dust, and you may lay
to that! If I hadn't took to you like pitch, do
you think I'd have been here a-warning of
you? All's up-you can't make nor mend; it's
to save your neck that I'm a-speaking, and if
one of the wild 'uns knew it, where 'ud I be,
Tom-now, tell me, where 'ud I be?"
"Silver," said the other man-and I observed
he was not only red in the face, but spoke as
hoarse as a crow, and his voice shook, too, like
a taut rope-''Silver," says he, ''you're old, and
you're honest, or has the name for it; and
you've money, too, which lots of poor sailors
hasn't; and you're brave, or ''m mistook. And
will you tell me you'll let yourself be led away
with that kind of a mess of swabs? not you!
As sure as God sees me, I'd sooner lose my
hand. If I turn agin my dooty a
And then all of a sudden he was interrupted
by a noise. I had found one of the honest hands
-well, here, at that same moment, came news
TuHE First BLow 131
of another. Far away out in the marsh there
arose, all of a sudden, a sound like the cry of
anger, then another on the back of it; and then
one horrid, long-drawn scream. The rocks of
the Spyglass re-echoed it a score of times; the
whole troop of marsh-birds rose again, darken-
ing heaven with a simultaneous whirr; and
long after that death yell was still ringing in my
brain, silence had re-established its empire, and
only the rustle of the redescending birds and
the boom of the distant surges disturbed the
languor of the afternoon.
Tom had leaped at the sound, like a horse at
the spur; but Silver had not winked an eye.
He stood where he was, resting lightly on his
crutch, watching his companion like a snake
about to spring.
"John!" said the sailor, stretching out his
hand.
"Wands off!" cried Silver, leaping back a
yard, as it seemed to me, with the speed and
security of a trained gymnast.
"Hands off, if you like, John Silver," said the
other. "It's a black conscience that can make
you feared of me. But, in heaven's name, tell
me what was that?"
"That?" returned Silver, smiling away, but
warier than ever, his eye a mere pin-point in his
big face; but gleaming like a crumb of glass.
"That? Oh, I reckon that'll be Alan."
i22 TREASURE ISLAND
And at this poor Tom flashed out like a
hero.
"Ajan!" he cried. "Then rest his soul for a
true seaman! And as for you, John Silver, long
you've been a mate of mine, but you're mate of
mine no more. If I die like a dog, I'll die in my
dooty. You've killed Alan, have you? Kill me,
too, if you can. But I defies you."
And with that, this brave fellow turned his
10 back directly on the cook, and set off walking
for the beach. But he was not destined to go
far. With a cry, John seized the branch of a
tree, whipped the crutch out of his armpit, and
sent that uncouth missile hurtling through the
15 air. It struck poor Tom, point foremost, and
with stunning violence, right between the
shoulders in the middle of his back. His hands
flew up, he gave a sort of gasp, and fell.
Whether he were injured much or little, none
could ever tell. Like enough, to judge from the
sound, his back was broken on the spot. But he
had no time given him to recover. Silver, agile
as a monkey, even without leg or crutch, was
on the top of him next moment, and had twice
buried his knife up to the hilt in that defence-
less body. From my place of ambush, I could
hear him pant aloud as he struck the blows.
I do not know what it rightly is to faint, but
I do know that for the next little while the
30 whole world swam away from before me in a
ol
2 ot
eS
in i tan |
A
= LE = Zp")
WARWICI GOBLE
Tuer First Blow
Tue First BLow Tas
whirling mist; Silver and the birds, and the tall
Spyglass hilltop, going round and round and
topsy-turvy before my eyes, and all manner of
bells ringing and distant voices shouting in my
ear.
When I came again to myself, the monster
had pulled himself together, his crutch under
his arm, his hat upon his head. Just before him
Tom lay motionless upon the sward; but the
murderer minded him not a whit, cleansing his
blood-stained knife the while upon a wisp of
grass. Everything else was unchanged, the sun
still shining mercilessly on the steaming marsh
and the tall pinnacle of the mountain, and I
could scarce persuade myself that murder had
been actually done, and a human life cruelly
cut short a moment since, before my eyes.
But now John put his hand into his pocket,
brought out a whistle, and blew upon it several
modulated blasts, that rang far across the
heated air. I could not tell, of course, the mean-
ing of the signal; but it instantly awoke my
fears. More men would be coming. I might be
discovered. They had already slain two of the
honest people; after Tom and Alan, might not
I come next?
Instantly I began to extricate myself and
crawl back again, with what speed and silence
I could manage, to the more open portion of
the wood. As I did so, I could hear hails coming
or
oO
1 oO
1 Or
136 TREASURE ISLAND
and going between the old buccaneer and his
comrades, and this sound of danger lent me
wings. As soon as I was clear of the thicket, I
ran as I never ran before, scarce minding the
direction of my flight, so long as it led me from
the murderers; and as I ran, fear grew and
grew upon me, until it turned into a kind of
frenzy.
Indeed, could anyone be more entirely lost
than I? When the gun fired, how should I dare
to go down to the boats among those fiends,
still smoking from their crime? Would not the
first of them who saw me wring my neck like
a snipe's? Would not my absence itself be an
evidence to them of my alarm, and therefore
of my fatal knowledge? It was all over, I
thought. Good-bye to the Hispaniola; good-bye
to the squire, the doctor, and the captain! |
There was nothing left for me but death by.
starvation, or death by the hands of the
mutmeers,
All this while, as I say, I was still running,
and, without taking any notice, I had drawn
near to the foot of the little hill with the two
peaks, and had got into a part of the island
where the live-oaks grew more widely apart,
and seemed more like forest trees in their bear-
ing and dimensions. Mingled with these were a
few scattered pines, some fifty, some nearer
seventy, feet high. The air, too, smelt more
freshly than down beside the marsh.
And here a fresh alarm brought me to a
standstill with a thumping heart.
i
il
Or
o
CHAPTER XV
Tue MAN OF THE ISLAND
From the side of the hill, which was here
steep and stony, a spout of gravel was dis-
lodged, and fell rattling and bounding through
the trees. My eyes turned instinctively in that
direction, and I saw a figure leap with great
rapidity behind the trunk of a pine. What it
was, whether bear or man or monkey, I could
in no wise tell. It seemed dark and shaggy;
more I knew not. But the terror of this new
apparition brought me to a stand.
I was now, it seemed, cut off upon both sides;
behind me the murderers, before me this lurk-
ing nondescript.° And immediately I began to
prefer the dangers that I knew to those I knew
not. Silver himself appeared less terrible in
contrast with this creature of the woods, and I
turned on my heel, and, looking sharply behind
me over my shoulder, began to retrace my steps
in the direction of the boats.
Instantly the figure reappeared, and, making
a wide circuit, began to head me off. I was
tired, at any rate; but had I been as fresh as
when I rose, I could see it was in vain for me
THE MAN oF THE ISLAND 139
to contend in speed with such an adversary.
From trunk to trunk the creature flitted like
a deer, running man-like on two legs, but unlike
any man that I had ever seen, stooping almost
double as it ran. Yet a man it was, I could no
longer be in doubt about that.
I began to recall what I had heard of can-
nibals. I was within an ace of calling for help.
But the mere fact that he was a man, however
wild, had somewhat reassured me, and my fear
of Silver began to revive in proportion. I stood
still, therefore, and cast about for some method
of escape; and as I was so thinking, the recol-
lection of my pistol flashed into my mind. As
soon as I remembered I was not defenceless,
courage glowed again in my heart; and I set my
face resolutely for this man of the island, and
walked briskly towards him.
He was concealed, by this time, behind an-
other tree trunk; but he must have been watch-
ing me closely, for as soon as I began to move
in his direction he reappeared and took a step
to meet me. Then he hesitated, drew back,
came forward again, and at last, to my wonder
and confusion, threw himself on his knees and
held out his clasped hands in supplication.
At that I once more stopped.
"Who are you?" I asked.
"Ben Gunn," he answered, and his voice
sounded hoarse and awkward, like a rusty lock.
oo
or
af o
1 On
140 TREASURE ISLAND
"T'm poor Ben Gunn, I am; and I haven't spoke
with a Christian these three years."
I could now see that he was a white man like
myself, and that his features were even pleas-
ing. His skin, wherever it was exposed, was
burnt by the sun; even his lips were black, and
his fair eyes looked quite startling in so dark a
face. Of all the beggar-men that I had seen or
fancied, he was the chief for raggedness. He
was clothed with tatters of old ship's canvas
and old sea cloth; and this extraordinary patch-
work was all held together by a system of the
most various and incongruous® fastenings,
brass buttons, bits of stick, and loops of tarry
gaskin.° About his waist he wore an old brass-
buckled leather belt, which was the one thing
solid in his whole accoutrement.°
"Three years!" I cried. "Were you ship-
wrecked?"
"Nay, mate," said he-"marooned."
I had heard the word, and I knew it stood
for a horrible kind of punishment common
enough among the buccaneers, in which the
offender is put ashore with a little powder and
shot, and left behind on some desolate and
distant island.
"Marooned three years agone," he continued,
"and lived on goats since then, and berries, and
oysters. Wherever a man is, says I, a man can
do for himself. But, mate, my heart is sore for
THE MAN oF THE ISLAND I4I
Christian diet. You mightn't happen to have a
piece of cheese about you, now? No? Well,
many's the long night I've dreamed of cheese-
toasted, mostly-and woke up again, and here
I were."
"Tf ever I can get aboard again," said I, "you
shall have cheese by the stone.°"
All this time he had been feeling the stuff of
my jacket, smoothing my hands, looking at my
boots, and generally, in the intervals of his
speech, showing a childish pleasure in the pres-
ence of a fellow-creature. But at my last words
he perked up into a kind of startled slyness.
"If ever you can get aboard again, says
you?" he repeated. "Why, now, who's to hinder
you?"
"Not you, I know," was my reply.
"And right you was," he cried. '""Now you-
what do you call yourself, mate?"
"Jim," I told him.
"Jim, Jim,' says he, quite pleased appar-
ently. "Well, now, Jim, I've lived that rough as
you'd be ashamed to hear of. Now, for instance,
you wouldn't think I had had a pious mother
-to look at me?" he asked.
"Why, no, not in particular," I answered.
"Ah, well," said he, "but I had-remarkable
pious. And I was a civil, pious boy, and could
rattle. off my catechism that fast, as you
couldn't tell one word from another. And here's
Hm oO
H cr
to (-)
a!
sl
or
i)
or
142 TREASURE ISLAND
what it come to, Jim, and it begun with chuck-
farthen® on the blessed grave-stones! That's
what it begun with, but it went further'n that;
and so my mother told me, and predicked the
whole, she did, the pious woman! But it were
Providence that put me here. I've thought it all
out in this here lonely island, and I'm back on
piety. You don't catch me tasting rum so much;
but just a thimbleful for luck, of course, the
first chance I have. I'm bound I'll be good, and
I see the way to. And, Jim,"-looking all round
him, and lowering his voice to a whisper-'''m
rich."
I now felt sure that the poor fellow had gone
crazy in his solitude, and I suppose I must have
shown the feeling in my face; for he repeated
the statement hotly: -
"Rich! rich! I says. And [ll tell you what:
T'll make a man of you, Jim. Ah, Jim, you'll
bless your stars, you will, you was the first that
found me!"
And at this there came suddenly a lowering
shadow over his face, and he tightened his
grasp upon my hand, and raised a forefinger
threateningly before my eyes.
"Now, Jim, you tell me true: that ain't Flint's
ship?" he asked.
At this I had a happy inspiration. I began to
believe that I had found an ally, and I answered
30 him at once.
THE MAN oF THE ISLAND 143
"Tt's not Flint's ship, and Flint is dead; but
Til tell you true, as you ask me-there are
some of Flint's hands aboard; worse luck for
the rest of us."
"Not a man-with one-leg?" he gasped.
"Silver?" I asked.
"Ah, Silver!" says he; "that were his name."
"'He's the cook; and the ringleader, too."
He was still holding me by the wrist, and at
that he gave it quite a wring.
"Tf you was sent by Long John," he said,
"T'm as good as pork, and I know it. But where
was you, do you suppose?"
I had made my mind up in a moment, and
by way of answer told him the whole story of
our voyage, and the predicament in which we
found ourselves. He heard me with the keenest
interest, and when I had done he patted me on
the head.
"You're a good lad, Jim,' he said; 'and
you're all in a clove hitch,° ain't you? Well, you
just put your trust in Ben Gunn-Ben Gunn's
the man to do it. Would you think it likely,
now, that your squire would prove a liberal-
minded one in case of help-him being in a
clove hitch, as you remark?"
I told him the squire was the most liberal of
men.
"Ay, but you see," returned Ben Gunn, "I
didn't mean giving me a gate to keep, and a
On
2 i)
144 "TREASURE ISLAND
shuit of livery® clothes, and such; that's not
my mark, Jim. What I mean is, would he be
likely to come down to the toon of, say one
thousand pounds out of money that's as good
as a man's own already?"
"T am sure he would," said I. "As it was, all
hands. were to share."
"And a passage home?" he added, with a
look of great shrewdness.
"Why," I cried, "the squire's a gentleman.
And besides, if we got rid of the others, we
should want you to help work the vessel home."
"Ah," said he, "so you would." And he
seemed very much relieved.
"Now, Tl tell you what," he went on. "So
much I'll tell you, and no more. I were in Flint's
ship when he buried the treasure; he and six
along-six strong seamen. They was ashore
nigh on a week, and us standing off and on in
the old Walrus. One fine day up went the signal,
and here come Flint by himself :n a little boat,
and his head done up in a blue scarf. The sun
was getting up, and mortal white he looked
about the cutwater.° But, there he was, you
mind, and the six all dead-dead and buried.
How he done it, not a man aboard us could
make cut. It was battle, murder, and sudden
death, leastways-him against six. Billy Bones
was the mate; Long John, he was quarter-
master; and they asked him where the treasure
THE MAN oF THE ISLAND 145
was. 'Ah,' says he, 'you can go ashore, if you
like, and stay,' he says; 'but as for the ship,
_ she'll beat up for more, by thunder!' That's
what he said.
"Well, I was in another ship three years
back, and we sighted this island. 'Boys,' said I,
'here's Flint's treasure; let's land and find it.'
The cap'n was displeased at that; but my mess-
mates were all of a mind, and landed. Twelve
days they looked for it, and every day they had
the worse word for me, until one fine morning
all hands went aboard. 'As for you, Benjamin
Gunn,' says they, 'here's a musket,' they says,
'and a spade, and pickaxe. You can stay here,
and find Flint's money for yourself,' they says.
"Well, Jim, three years have I been here, and
not a bite of Christian diet from that day to
this. But now, you look here; look at me. Do
I look like a man before the mast? No, says
you. Nor I weren't, neither, I says."
And with that he winked and pinched me
hard.
"Just you mention them words to your
squire, Jim'-he went on: "Nor he weren't,
neither-that's the words. Three years he were
the man of this island, light and dark, fair and
rain; and sometimes he would, maybe, think
upon a prayer (says you), and sometimes he
would, maybe, think of his old mother, so be as
she's alive (you'll say); but the most part of
ft 0
or
1 on
2 i)
146 TREASURE ISLAND
Gunn's time (this is what you'll say )-the most
part of his time was took up with another
matter. And then you'll give him a nip, like 1
do."
And he pinched me again in the most con-
fidential manner.
"Then," he continued-"then you'll up, and
you'll say this:-Gunn is a good man (you'll
say), and he puts a precious sight more con-
fidence-a precious sight, mind that-in a
gen'leman born than in these gen'lemen of for-
tune, having been one hisself."
"Well," I said, "I don't understand one word
that you've been saying. But that's neither here
nor there; for how am I to get on board?"
"Ah," said he, "that's the hitch, for sure.
Well, there's my boat, that I made with my two
hands. I keep her under the white rock. If the
worst come to the worst, we might try that
after dark. Hi!" he broke out, "what's that?"
For just then, although the sun had still an
hour or two to run, all the echoes of the island
awoke and bellowed to the thunder of a cannon.
"They have begun to fight!" I cried. 'Follow
me."
And I began to run towards the anchorage,
my terrors all forgotten; while, close at my
side, the marooned man in his goatskins trotted
easily and lightly.
"Left, left," says he; "keep to your left hand,
THE MAN oF THE ISLAND 147
mate Jim! Under the trees with you! Theer's
where I killed my first goat. They don't come
down here now; they're all mast-headed on
them mountings for the fear of Benjamin Gunn.
Ah! and there's the cetemery'-cemetery, he
must have meant. "You see the mounds? I
come here and prayed, nows and thens, when
I thought maybe a Sunday would be about doo.
It weren't quite a chapel, but it seemed more
solemn like; and then, says you, Ben Gunn
was short-handed-no chapling, nor so much
as a Bible and a flag, you says."
So he kept talking as I ran, neither expecting
nor receiving any answer.
The cannon-shot was followed, after a con-
siderable interval, by a volley of small arms.
Another pause, and then, not a quarter of a
mile in front of me, I beheld the Union Jack
flutter in the air above a wood.
PART IV
' THE STOCKADE
CHAPTER XVI
NARRATIVE CONTINUED BY THE Doctor: How
THE SutIp Was ABANDONED
Ir was about half-past one-three bells in
the sea phrase-that the two boats went ashore
from the Hispaniola. The captain, the squire,
and I were talking matters over in the cabin.
Had there been a breath of wind we should
have fallen on the six mutineers who were left
aboard with us, slipped our cable, and away to
sea. But the wind was wanting; and, to com-
plete our helplessness, down came Hunter with
the news that Jim Hawkins had slipped into a
boat and was gone ashore with the rest.
It never occurred to us to doubt Jim Haw-
kins; but we were alarmed for his safety. With
the men in the temper they were in, it seemed
an even chance if we should see the lad again.
We ran on deck. The pitch was bubbling in the
seams; the nasty stench of the place turned me
sick; if ever a man smelt fever and dysentery,
it was in that abominable anchorage. The six
scoundrels were sitting grumbling under a sail
in the forecastle; ashore we could see the gigs
made fast, and a man sitting in each, hard by
152 TREASURE ISLAND
where the river runs in. One of them was whis-
tling "'Lillibullero.°"
Waiting was a strain; and it was decided
that Hunter and I should go ashore with the
jolly-boat,° in quest of information.
The gigs had leaned to their right; but
Hunter and I pulled straight in, in the direction
of the stockade upon the chart. The two who
were left guarding their boats seemed in a
10 bustle at our appearance; '"'Lillibullero"
stopped off, and I could see the pair discussing
what they ought to do. Had they gone and
told Silver, all might have turned out differ-
ently; but they had their orders, I suppose, and
15 decided to sit quietly where they were and hark
back again to "Lillibullero."
There was a slight bend in the coast, and I
steered so as to put it between us; even before
we landed we had thus lost sight of the gigs.
20 I jumped out and came as near running as I
durst, with a big silk handkerchief under my
hat for coolness' sake, and a brace of pistols
ready primed for safety.
I had not gone a hundred yards when I
reached the stockade.
This was how it was: a spring of clear water
rose almost at the top of a knoll. Well, on the
knoll, and enclosing the spring, they had
clapped a stout log-house, fit to hold two score
30 of people on a pinch, and loopholed for mus-
or
2 or
is iy | 2 ||
WASNCK GPBLE Fri VS AN NWA
Tue CAPTAIN, THE SQUIRE, AND I
How THE Suip WAs ABANDONED 155
ketry on every side. All round this they had
cleared a wide space, and then the thing was
completed by a paling six feet high, without
door or opening, too strong to pull down with-
out time and labour, and too open to shelter the
besiegers. The people in the log-house had them
in every way; they stood quiet in shelter and
shot the others like partridges. All they wanted
was a good watch and food; for, short of a
complete surprise, they might have held the
place against a regiment.
What particularly took my fancy was the
spring. For, though we had a good enough
place of it in the cabin of the Hispaniola, with
plenty of arms and ammunition, and things to
eat, and excellent wines, there had been one
thing overlooked-we had no water. I was
thinking this over, when there came ringing
over the island the cry of a man at the point of
death. I was not new to violent death-I have
served his Royal Highness the Duke of Cum-
berland,° and got a wound myself at Fontenoy
-but I know my pulse went dot and carry one.
"Jim Hawkins is gone," was my first thought.
It is something to have been an old soldier, 2:
but more still to have been a doctor. There is
no time to dilly-dally in our work. And so now
I made up my mind instantly, and with no time
lost returned to the shore, and jumped on board
the jolly-boat.
on
be wai
oO
2 So
156 TREASURE ISLAND
By good fortune Hunter pulled a good oar.
We made the water fly; and the boat was soon
alongside, and I aboard the schooner.
I found them all shaken, as was natural. The
squire was sitting down, as white as a sheet,
thinking of the harm he had led us to, the good
soul! and one of the six forecastle hands was
little better.
"There's a man," says Captain Smollett, nod-
ding towards him, ''new to this work. He came
nigh-hand fainting, doctor, when he heard the
cry. Another touch of the rudder and that man
would join us."
I told my plan to the captain, and between
us we settled on the details of its accomplish-
ment.
We put old Redruth in the gallery between
the cabin and the forecastle, with three or four
loaded muskets and a mattress for protection.
Hunter brought the boat round under the stern-
port, and Joyce and I set to work loading her
with powder-tins, muskets, bags of biscuits,
kegs of pork, a cask of cognac, and my in-
valuable medicine chest.
In the meantime, the squire and the cap-
tain stayed on deck, and the latter hailed
the coxswain, who was the principal man
aboard.
"Mr. Hands," he said, "here are two of us
with a brace of pistols each. If any one of you
How THE SHip WAS ABANDONED 157
six makes a signal of any description, that
man's dead."
They were a good deal taken aback; and,
after a little consultation, one and all tumbled
down the fore companion, thinking, no doubt, to
take us on the rear. But when they saw Red-
ruth waiting for them in the sparred gallery,
they went about ship at once, and a head
popped out again on deck.
"Down, dog!" cries the captain.
And the head popped back again; and we
heard no more, for the time, of these six very
faint-hearted seamen.
By this time, tumbling things in as they
came, we had the jolly-boat loaded as much as
we dared. Joyce and I got out through the
stern-port, and we made for shore again, as
fast as oars could take us.
This second trip fairly aroused the watchers
along the shore. "Lillibullero" was dropped
again; and just before we lost sight of them
behind the little point, one of them whipped
ashore and disappeared. I had half a mind to
change my plan and destroy their boats, but
I feared that Silver and the others might be
close at hand, and all might very well be lost
by trying for too much.
We had soon touched land in the same place
as before, and set to provision the block-house.
All three made the first journey, heavily laden,
i) o
On
158 TREASURE ISLAND
and tossed our stores over the palisade. Then,
leaving Joyce to guard them-one man, to be
sure, but with half a dozen muskets-Hunter
and I returned to the jolly-boat, and loaded
ourselves once more. So we proceeded without
pausing to take breath, till the whole cargo was
bestowed, when the two servants took up their
position in the block-house, and I, with all my
power, sculled back to the Hispaniola.
That we should have risked a second boat-
load seems more daring than it really was. They
had the advantage of numbers, of course, but
we had the advantage of arms. Not one of the
men ashore had a musket, and before they
could get within range for pistol shooting, we
flattered ourselves we should be able to give a
good account of a half-dozen at least.
The squire was waiting for me at the stern
window, all his faintness gone from him. He
caught the painter° and made it fast, and we
fell to loading the boat for our very lives. Pork,
powder, and biscuit was the cargo, with only
a musket and a cutlass apiece for the squire
and me and Redruth and the captain. The rest
of the arms and powder we dropped overboard
in two fathoms and a half of water, so that we
could see the bright steel shining far below us
in the sun, on the clean, sandy bottom.
By this time the tide was beginning to ebb,
and the ship was swinging round to her anchor.
How THE SHIP Was ABANDONED _ 159
Voices were heard faintly halloaing in the direc-
tion of the two gigs; and though this reassured
us for Joyce and Hunter, who were well to the
eastward it warned our party to be off.
Redruth retreated from his place in the
gallery, and dropped into the boat, which we
then brought round to the ship's counter,° to
be handier for Captain Smollett.
"Now, men," said he, "do you hear me?"'
There was no answer from the forecastle.
"Tt's to you, Abraham Gray-it's to you lam
speaking."
Still no reply.
"Gray,' resumed Mr. Smollett, a little
louder, "I am leaving this ship, and I order
you to follow your captain. I know you are a
good man at bottom, and I daresay not one of
the lot of you's as bad as he makes out. I have
my watch here in my hand; I give you thirty
seconds to join me in."
There was a pause.
"Come, my fine fellow," continued the cap-
tain, "don't hang so long in stays. I'm risking
my life, and the lives of these good gentlemen,
every second."
There was a sudden scuffle, a sound of blows,
and out burst Abraham Gray with a knife-cut
on the side of the cheek, and came running to
the captain, like a dog to the whistle.
"T'm with you, sir," said he.
mal
tre ai
160 TREASURE ISLAND
And the next moment he and the captain had
dropped aboard of us, and we had shoved off
and given way.
We were clear out of the ship; but not yet
5 ashore in our stockade.
CHAPTER XVII
NARRATIVE CONTINUED BY THE Doctor: THE
Jotty-Boat's Last Trip
Tuis fifth trip was quite different from any
of the others. In the first place, the little gal-
lipot° of a boat that we were in was gravely
overloaded. Five grown men, and three of them
-Trelawney, Redruth, and the captain-over
six feet high, was already more than she was
meant to carry. Add to that the powder, pork,
and bread-bags. The gunwale was lipping
astern. Several times we shipped a little water,
and my breeches and the tails of my coat were
all soaking wet before we had gone a hundred
yards.
The captain made us trim the boat, and we
got her to lie a little more evenly. All the same,
we were afraid to breathe.
In the second place, the ebb was now making
-a strong rippling current running westward
through the basin, and then south'ard and sea-
ward down the straits by which we had entered
in the morning. Even the ripples were a danger
to our overloaded craft; but the worst of it was
that we were swept out of our true course, and
oO
162 TREASURE ISLAND
away from our proper landing-place behind the
point. If we let the current have its way we
should come ashore beside the gigs, where the
pirates might appear at any moment.
"T cannot keep her head for the stockade,
sir," said I to the captain. I was steering, while
he and Redruth, two fresh men, were at the
oars. 'The tide keeps washing her down. Could
you pull a little stronger?"
"Not without swamping the boat," said he.
"You must bear up, sir, if you please-bear up
'until you see you're gaining."
I tried, and found by experiment that the
tide kept sweeping us westward until I had
laid her head due east, or just about right
angles to the way we ought to go.
"We'll never get ashore at this rate," said I.
"Tf it's the only course that we can lie, sir,
we must even lie it,"' returned the captain. "We
must keep up-stream. You see, sir," he went on,
"Gf once we dropped to leeward of the landing-
place, it's hard to say where we should get
ashore, besides the chance of being boarded by
the gigs; whereas, the way we go the current
must slacken, and then we can dodge back
along the shore."
"The current's less a'ready, sir,' said the
man Gray, who was sitting in the fore-sheets;
"vou can ease her off a bit."
"Thank you, my man," said I, quite as if
THE JoLty-Boat's Last Trip 163
nothing had happened; for we had all quietly
made up our minds to treat him like one of
ourselves.
Suddenly the captain spoke up again, and I
thought his voice was a little changed.
"The gun!" said he.
"T have thought of that," said I, for I made
sure he was thinking of a bombardment of the
fort. "They could never get the gun ashore, and
if they did, they could never haul it through
the woods."
"Look astern, doctor," replied the captain.
We had entirely forgotten the long nine; and
there, to our horror, were the five rogues busy
about her, getting off her jacket, as they called
the stout tarpaulin cover under which she
sailed. Not only that, but it flashed into my
mind at the same moment that the round-shot
and the powder for the gun had been left be-
hind, and a stroke with an axe would put it all :
into the possession of the evil ones aboard.
"Israel was Flint's gunner,' said Gray,
hoarsely.
At any risk, we put the boat's head direct for
the landing place. By this time we had got so
far out of the run of the current that we kept
steerage way even at our necessarily gentle rate
of rowing, and I could keep her steady for the
goal. But the worst of it was, that with the
course I now held, we turned our broadside
uw
be
bw
it}
Or
1 Or
tw oO
164 TREASURE ISLAND
instead of our stern to the Hispaniola, and
offered a target like a barn door.
I could hear as well as see, that brandy-faced
rascal, Israel Hands, plumping down a round-
shot on the deck.
'"'Who's the best shot?" asked the captain.
"Mr. Trelawney, out and away," said I.
"Mr. Trelawney, will you please pick me off
one of these men, sir? Hands, if possible," said
the captain.
Trelawney was as cool as steel. He looked
to the priming of his gun.
"Now," cried the captain, "easy with that
gun, sir, or you'll swamp the boat. All hands
stand by to trim her when he aims."
The squire raised his gun, the rowing ceased,
and we leaned over to the other side to keep
the balance, and all was so nicely contrived that
we did not ship a drop.
They had the gun, by this time, slewed round
upon the swivel, and Hands, who was at the
muzzle with the rammer, was, in consequence,
the most exposed. However, we had no luck;
for just as Trelawney fired, down he stooped,
the ball whistled over him, and it was one of.
the other four who fell.
The cry he gave was echoed, not only by his
companions on board, but by a great number of
voices from the shore, and looking in that direc-
tion I saw the other pirates trooping out from
THE JoLLy-Boat's Last Trip 165
among the trees and tumbling into their places
in the boats.
"Here come the gigs, sir," said I.
"Give way then," cried the captain. "We
mustn't mind if we swamp her now. If we can't
get ashore, all's up."
"Only one of the gigs is being manned, sir,"
I added, "the crew of the other most likely
going round by shore to cut us off."
"They'll have a hot run, sir," returned the
captain. "Jack ashore, you know. It's not them
I mind; it's the round-shot. Carpet bowls! My
lady's maid couldn't miss. Tell us, squire, when
you see the match, and we'll hold water."
In the meanwhile we had been making head-
way at a good pace for a boat so overloaded,
and we had shipped but little water in the
process. We were now close in; thirty or forty
strokes and we should beach her; for the ebb
had already disclosed a narrow belt of sand
below the clustering trees. The gig was no
longer to be feared; the little point had already
concealed it from our eyes. The ebb-tide, which
had so cruelly delayed us, was now making
reparation,° and delaying our assailants. The
one source of danger was the gun.
"Tf I durst," said the captain, "I'd stop and
pick off another man."
But it was plain that they meant nothing
should delay their shot. They had never so
oO
o
Or
166 TREASURE ISLAND
much as looked at their fallen comrade, though
he was not dead, and I could see him trying
to crawl away.
"Ready!" cried the squire.
"Hold!" cried the captain, quick as an echo.
And he and Redruth backed with a great
heave that sent her stern bodily under water.
The report fell in at the same instant of time.
This was the first that Jim heard, the sound of
the squire's shot not having reached him. Where
the ball passed, not one of us precisely knew;
but I fancy it must have been over our heads,
and that the wind of it may have contributed
to our disaster.
At any rate, the boat sank by the stern, quite
gently, in three feet of water, leaving the cap-
tain and myself, facing each other, on our feet.
The other three took complete headers, and
came up again, drenched and bubbling.
So far there was no great harm. No lives
were lost, and we could wade ashore in safety.
But there were all our stores at the bottom,
and, to make things worse, only two guns out
of five remained in a state for service. Mine I
had snatched from my knees and held over my
head, by a sort of instinct. As for the captain,
he had carried his over his shoulder by a
bandoleer,° and like a wise man, lock upper-
most. The other three had gone down with the
30 boat.
THE Jotity-Boat's Last Trip 167
To add to our concern, we heard voices
already drawing near us in the woods along
shore; and we had not only the danger of be-
ing cut off from the stockade in our half-crip-
pled state, but the fear before us whether, if
Hunter and Joyce were attacked by a half a
dozen, they would have the sense and conduct
to stand firm. Hunter was steady, that we
knew; Joyce was a doubtful case-a pleasant,
polite man for a valet, and to brush one's
clothes, but not entirely fitted for a man of
war.
With all this in our minds, we waded ashore
as fast as we could, leaving behind us the poor
jolly-boat, and a good half of all our powder
and provisions.
on
rc
oO
CHAPTER XVIII
NARRATIVE CONTINUED BY THE Doctor; END
OF THE First Day's FIGHTING
WE made our best speed across the strip of
wood that now divided us from the stockade;
and at every step we took the voices of the
buccaneers rang nearer. Soon we could hear
their footfalls as they ran, and the cracking of
the branches as they breasted across a bit of
thicket.
I began to see we should have a brush for
it in earnest, and looked to my priming.
"Captain," said 1, "Trelawney is the dead
shot. Give him your gun; his own is useless."
They exchanged guns, and Trelawney, silent
and cool as he had been since the beginning of
the bustle, hung a moment on his heel to see
that all was fit for service. At the same time,
observing Gray to be unarmed, I handed him
my cutlass. It did all our hearts good to see
him spit in his hand, knit his brows, and make
the blade sing through the air. It was plain
from every line of his body that our new hand
was worth his salt.
Forty paces farther we came to the edge of
the wood and saw the stockade in front of us.
We struck the enclosure about the middle of the
END OF THE First Day's FIGHTING 169
south side, and, almost at the same time, seven
mutineers-Job Anderson, the boatswain, at
their head-appeared in full cry at the south-
western corner.
They paused, as if taken aback; and before
they recovered, not only the squire and I, but
Hunter and Joyce from the block-house, had
time to fire. The four shots came in rather a
scattering volley; but they did the business:
one of the enemy actually fell, and the rest,
without hesitation, turned and plunged into
the trees.
After reloading, we walked down the outside
of the palisade to see to the fallen enemy. He
was stone dead-shot through the heart.
We began to rejoice over our good success,
when just at that moment a pistol cracked in
the bush, a ball whistled close past my ear,
and poor Tom Redruth stumbled and fell his
length on the ground. Both the squire and I
returned the shot; but as we had nothing to
aim at, it is probable we only wasted powder.
Then we reloaded, and turned our attention
to poor Tom.
The captain and Gray were already examin-
ing him; and I saw with half an eye that all
was over.
I believe the readiness of our return volley
had scattered the mutineers once more, for we
were' suffered without further molestation to
oN
oO
i
i)
or
170 TREASURE ISLAND
get the poor old gamekeeper hoisted over the
stockade, and carried, groaning and bleeding,
into the log-house.
Poor old fellow, he had not uttered one word
of surprise, complaint, fear, or even acquies-
cence,° from the very beginning of our troubles
till now, when we had laid him down in the
log-house to die. He had lain like a Trojan
behind his mattress in the gallery; he had fol-
lowed every order silently, doggedly, and well;
he was the oldest of our party by a score of
years; and now, sullen, old, serviceable serv-
ant, it was he that was to die.
The squire dropped down beside him on his
knees and kissed his hand, crying like a child.
"Be I going, doctor?" he asked.
"Tom, my man," said I, "you're going
home."
"T wish I had had a lick at them with the
gun first," he replied.
"Tom," said the squire, 'say you forgive me,
won't you?"
"Would that be respectful like, from me to
you, squire?" was the answer. "Howsoever, so
be it, amen!"
After a little while of silence, he said he
thought somebody might read a prayer. "It's
the custom, sir," he added, apologetically. And
not long after, without another word, he passed
30 away.
END OF THE First Day's FIGHTING 171
In the meantime the captain; whom I had
observed to be wonderfully swollen about the
chest and pockets, had turned out a great many
various stores-the British colours, a Bible, a
coil of stoutish rope, pen, ink, the log-book,
and pounds of tobacco. He had found a long-
ish fir-tree lying felled and trimmed in the
enclosure, and, with the help of Hunter, he had
set it up at the corner of the log-house where
the trunks crossed and made an angle. Then,
climbing on the roof, he had with his own hand
bent and run up the colours.
This seemed mightily to relieve him. He re-
entered the log-house, and set about counting
up the stores, as if nothing else existed. But
he had an eye on Tom's passage for all that;
and as soon as all was over, came forward
with another flag, and reverently spread it on
the body.
"Don't you take on, sir," he said, shaking
the squire's hand.
"All's well with him; no fear for a hand
that's been shot down in his duty to captain
and owner. It mayn't be good divinity, but
it's a fact."
Then he pulled me aside.
"Dr. Livesey," he said, "in how many weeks
do you and squire expect the consort?"
I told him it was a question, not of weeks,
but of months; that if we were not back by
or
172 TREASURE ISLAND
the end of August, Blandly was to send to find
us; but neither sooner nor later. "You can cal-
culate for yourself," I said.
"Why, yes," returned the captain,. scratching
his head, "and making a large allowance, sir,
for all the gifts of Providence, I should say
we were pretty close hauled."
"How do you mean?" I asked.
"Tt's a pity, sir, we lost that second load.
That's what I mean," replied the captain. "As
for powder and shot, we'll do. But the rations
are short, very short-so short, Dr. Livesey,
that we're, perhaps, as well without the extra
mouth."
And he pointed to the dead body under the
flag.
Just then, with a roar and a whistle, a round-
shot passed high above the roof of the log-
house and plumped far beyond us in the wood.
"Oho!" said the captain. "Blaze away!
You've little enough powder already, my lads."
At the second trial, the aim was better, and
the ball descended inside the stockade, scatter-
ing a cloud of sand, but doing no further dam-
age.
"Captain," said the squire, "the house is
quite invisible from the ship. It must be the
flag they are aiming at. Would it not be wiser
to take it in?"
"Strike my colours!" cried the captain. "No,
END OF THE First Dav's FIGHTING 173
sir, not I;" and, as soon as he said the words,
I think we all agreed with him. For it was
not only a piece of stout, seamanly, good feel-
ing; it was good policy besides, and showed
our enemies that we despised their cannonade.
All through the evening they kept thunder-
ing away. Ball after ball flew over or fell short,
or kicked up the sand in the enclosure; but
they had to fire so high that the shot fell dead
and buried itself in the soft sand. We had no
ricochet° to fear; and though one popped in
through the roof of the log-house and out again
through the floor, we soon got used to that sort
of horse-play, and minded it no more than
cricket.
"There is one thing good about all this," ob-
served the captain: '"'the wood in front of us
is likely clear. The ebb has made a good while;
our stores should be uncovered. Volunteers to
go and bring in pork."
Gray and Hunter were the first to come for-
ward. Well armed, they stole out of the stock-
ade; but it proved a useless mission. The mu-
tineers were bolder than we fancied, or they
put more trust in Israel's gunnery. For four
or five of them were busy carrying off our
stores, and wading out with them to one of
the gigs that lay close by, pulling an oar or so
to hold her steady against the current. Silver
was in the stern-sheets in command; and every
174 TREASURE ISLAND
man of them was now provided with a musket
from some secret magazine of their own.
The captain sat down to his log, and here is
the beginning of the entry: -
"Alexander Smollett, master; David Livesey,
ship's doctor; Abraham Gray, carpenter's
mate; John Trelawney, owner; John Hunter
and Richard Joyce, owner's servants, lands-
men-being al] that is left faithful of the ship's
10 company-with stores for ten days at short
rations, came ashore this day, and flew British
colours on the log-house in Treasure Island.
Thomas Redruth, owner's servant, landsman,
shot by the mutineers; James Hawkins, cabin-
15 boy: vs
And at the same time I was wondering over
poor Jim Hawkins's fate.
A hail on the land side.
"Somebody hailing us," said Hunter, who
20 was on guard.
"Doctor! squire! captain! Hello, Hunter, is
that you?" came the cries.
And I ran to the door in time to see Jim
Hawkins, safe and sound, come climbing over
25 the stockade.
on
CHAPTER XIX
NARRATIVE RESUMED BY JIM HAWKINS: THE
GARRISON IN THE STOCKADE
As soon as Ben Gunn saw the colours he
came to a halt, stopped me by the arm, and
sat down.
"Now," said he, ''there's your friends, sure
enough."
"Far more likely it's the mutineers,"' I an-
swered.
"That!" he cried. "Why, in a place like this,
where nobody puts in but gen'lemen of fortune,
Silver would fly the Jolly Roger, you don't
make no doubt of that. No; that's your friends.
There's been blows, too, and I reckon your
friends has had the best of it; and here they
are ashore in the old stockade, as was made
years and years ago by Flint. Ah, he was the
man to have a headpiece, was Flint! Barring
rum, his match were never seen. He were
afraid of none, not he; on'y Silver-Silver was
that genteel."
"Well," said I, "that may be so, and so be
it; all the more reason that I should hurry on
and join my friends."
or
1 Or
176 TREASURE ISLAND
"Nay, mate," returned Ben, "not you. You're
a good boy, or I'm mistook; but you're on'y a
boy, all told. Now, Ben Gunn is fly.° Rum
wouldn't bring me there, where you're going-
not rum wouldn't, till I see your born gen'le-
man, and gets it on his word of honour. And
you won't forget my words: 'A precious sight
(that's what you'll say), a precious sight more
confidence'-and then nips him."
And he pinched me the third time with the
same air of cleverness.
"And when Ben Gunn is wanted, you know
where to find him, Jim. Just wheer you found
him today. And him that comes is to have a
white thing in his hand: and he's to come
alone. Oh! and you'll say this: 'Ben Gunn,'
says you, 'has reasons of his own.' "
"Well," said I, "I believe I understand. You
have something to propose, and you wish to see
the squire or the doctor; and you're to be
found where I found you. Is that all?"
"And when? says you," he added. 'Why,
from about noon observation to about six
"Good," said I, "and now may I go?"
"You won't forget?" he inquired, anxiously.
"Precious sight, and reasons of his own, says
you. Reasons of his own; that's the mainstay;
as between man and man. Well, then'-still
holding me-"TI reckon you can go, Jim. And,
THE GARRISON IN THE STOCKA 077
Jim, if you was to see Silver, you wouldn't go
for to sell Ben Gunn? wild horses wouldn't
draw it from you? No, says you. And if them
pirates camp ashore, Jim, what would you say
but there'd be widders in the morning?"
Here he was interrupted by a loud report,
and a cannon ball came tearing through the
trees and pitched in the sand, not a hundred
yards from where we two were talking. The
next moment each of us had taken to his heels
in a different direction.
For a good hour to come frequent reports
shook the island, and balls kept crashing
through the woods. I moved from hiding-place
to hiding-place, always pursued, or so it seemed
to me, by these terrifying missiles. But towards
the end of the bombardment, though still I
durst not venture in the direction of the stock-
ade, where the balls fell oftenest, I had begun,
in a manner, to pluck up my heart again; and
after a long detour to the east, crept down
among the shore-side trees.
The sun had just set, the sea breeze was
rustling and tumbling in the woods, and ruffling
the grey surface of the anchorage; the tide,
too, was far out, and great tracts of sand lay
uncovered; the air, after the heat of the day,
chilled me through my jacket.
The Hispaniola still lay where she had an-
chored; but, sure enough, there was the Jolly
ol
1 i)
2 ol
178 TREASURE ISLAND
Roger-the black flag of piracy-flying from
her peak. Even as I looked, there came another
red flash and another report, that sent the
echoes clattering, and one more round-shot
whistled through the air. It was the last of the
cannonade.
I lay for some time, watching the bustle
which succeeded the attack. Men were demol-
ishing something with axes on the beach near
the stockade; the poor jolly-boat, I afterwards
discovered. Away, near the mouth of the river,
a great fire was glowing among the trees, and
between that point and the ship one of the gigs
kept coming and going, the men, whom I had
seen so gloomy, shouting at the oars like chil-
dren. But there was a sound in their voices
which suggested rum.
At length I thought I might return towards
the stockade. I was pretty far down on the low,
sandy spit that incloses the anchorage to the
east, and is joined at half-water to Skeleton
Island; and now, as I rose to my feet, I saw,
some distance further down the spit, and rising
from among low bushes, an isolated rock,
pretty high, and peculiarly white in colour. It
occurred to me that this might be the white
rock of which Ben Gunn had spoken, and that
some day or other a boat might be wanted, and
I should know where to look for one.
Then I skirted among the woods until I had
THE GARRISON IN THE STOCKADE- 179
regained the rear, or shoreward side, of the
stockade, and was soon warmly welcomed by
the faithful party.
I had soon told my story, and began to look
about me. The log-house was made of un-
squared trunks of pine-roof, walls, and floor.
The latter stood in several places as much as
a foot or a foot and a half above the surface
of the sand. There was a porch at the door,
and under this porch the little spring welled up
into an artificial basin of a rather odd kind-
no other than a great ship's kettle of iron, with
the bottom knocked out, and sunk "to her
bearings," as the captain said, among the sand.
Little had been left beside the framework of
or
the house; but in one corner there was a stone .
slab laid down by way of hearth, and an old
rusty iron basket to contain the fire.
The slopes of the knoll and all the inside of
the stockade had been cleared of timber to
build the house, and we could see by the
stumps what a fine and lofty grove had been
destroyed. Most of the soil had _ been
washed away or buried in drift after the re-
moval of the trees; only where the streamlet
ran down from the kettle a thick bed of moss
and some ferns and little creeping bushes were
still green among the sand. Very close around
the stockade-too close for defence, they said
-the wood still flourished high and dense, all s
oO
Or
180 TREASURE ISLAND
of fir on the land side, but towards the sea
with a large admixture of live-oaks.
The cold evening breeze, of which I have
spoken, whistled through every chink of the
rude building, and sprinkled the floor with a
continual rain of fine sand. There was sand in
our eyes, sand in our teeth, sand in our suppers,
sand dancing in the spring at the bottom of the
kettle, for all the world like porridge beginning
to boil. Our chimney was a square hole in the
roof; it was but a little part of the smoke that
found its way out, and the rest eddied about
the house, and kept us coughing and piping the
eye.
Add to this that Gray, the new man, had
his face tied up in a bandage for a cut he had
got in breaking away from the mutineers; and
that poor old Tom Redruth, still unburied, lay
along the wall, stiff and stark, under the Union
Jack.
If we had been allowed to sit idle, we should
all have fallen in the blues, but Captain Smol-
lett was never the man for that. All hands were
called up before him, and he divided us into
watches. The doctor, and Gray, and I, for one;
the squire, Hunter, and Joyce, upon the other.
Tired though we all were, two were sent out
for firewood; two more were set to dig a grave
for Redruth; the doctor was named cook; I
THe GARRISON IN THE STOCKADE I8I
was put sentry at the door; and the captain
himself went from one to another, keeping up
our spirits and lending a hand wherever it was
wanted.
From time to time the doctor came to the
door for a little air and to rest his eyes, which
were almost smoked out of his head; and when-
ever he did so, he had a word for me.
"That man Smollett," he said once, "is a
better man than I am. And when I say that it
means a deal, Jim."
Another time he came and was silent for
a while. Then he put his head on one side,
and looked at me.
"Ts this Ben Gunn a man?" he asked.
"T do not know, sir," said I. "I am not very
sure whether he's sane."
"Tf there's any doubt about the matter, he
is," returned the doctor. "A man who has been
three years biting his nails on a desert island,
Jim, can't expect to appear as sane as you or
me. It doesn't lie in human nature. Was it
cheese you said he had a fancy for?"
"Yes, sir, cheese,"' I answered.
"Well, Jim," says he, "just see the good that
comes of being dainty in your food. You've
seen my snuff-box, haven't you? And you never
saw me take snuff; the reason being that in my
snuff-box I carry a piece of Parmesan cheese-
or
2 i)
182 TREASURE ISLAND
a cheese made in Italy, very nutritious. we
that's for Ben Gunn!"
Before supper was eaten we buried old Tom
in the sand, and stood round him for a while
bare-headed in the breeze. A good deal of fire-
wood had been got in, but not enough for the
captain's fancy; and he shook his head over
it, and told us we "must get back to this to-
morrow rather livelier." Then, when we had
eaten our pork, and each had a good stiff
glass of brandy grog, the three chiefs got to-
gether in a corner to discuss our prospects.
It appears they were at their wits' end what
to do, the stores being so low that we must
have been starved into surrender long before
help came. But our best hope, it was decided,
was to kill off the buccaneers until they either
hauled down their flag or ran away with the
Hispaniola. From nineteen they were already
reduced to fifteen, two others were wounded,
and one, at least-the man shot beside the gun
-severely wounded, if he were not dead. Every
time we had a crack at them, we were to take
it, saving our own lives, with the extremest
care. And, besides that, we had two able allies
-rum and the climate.
As for the first, though we were about half
a mile away, we could hear them roaring and
singing late into the night; and as for the sec-
ond, the doctor staked his wig that, camped
THE GARRISON IN THE STOCKADE 183
where they were in the marsh, and unprovided
with remedies, the half of them would be on
their backs before a week.
"So," he added, "'if we are not all shot down
first, they'll be glad to be packing in the
schooner. It's always a ship, and they can get
to buccaneering again, I suppose."
"First ship that ever I lost," said Captain
Smollett.
I was dead tired, as you may fancy; and
when I got to sleep, which was not till after
a great deal of tossing, I slept like a log of
wood.
The rest had long been up, and had already
breakfasted and increased the pile of firewood
by about half as much again, when I was wak-
ened by a bustle and the sound of voices.
"Flag of truce!" I heard someone say; and
then, immediately after, with a cry of surprise,
"Silver himself!"
And, at that, up I jumped, and, rubbing my
eyes, ran to a loophole in the wall.
oO
is On
CHAPTER XX
SILVER'S EMBASSY
SuRE enough, there were two men just out-
side the stockade, one of them waving a white
cloth; the other, no less a person than Silver
himself, standing placidly by.
It was still quite early, and the coldest morn-
ing that I think I ever was abroad in; a chill
that pierced into the marrow. The sky was
bright and cloudless overhead, and the tops of
the trees shone rosily in the sun. But where Sil-
ver stood with his lieutenant all was still in
shadow, and they waded knee deep in a low,
white vapour that had crawled during the night
out of the morass. The chill and the vapour
taken together told a poor tale of the island.
It was plainly a damp, feverish, unhealthy spot.
"Keep indoors, men," said the captain. "Ten
to one this is a trick."
Then he hailed the buccaneer.
"Who goes? Stand, or we fire."
"Flag of truce," cried Silver.
The captain was in the porch, keeping him-
self carefully out of the way of a treacherous
shot should any be intended. He turned and
spoke to us:-
SILVER'S EMBASSY 185
"Doctor's watch on the lookout. Dr. Livesey
take the north side, if you please; Jim,
the east; Gray, west. The watch below,
all hands to load muskets. Lively, men, and
careful."
And then he turned again to the mutineers.
"And what do you want with your flag of
truce?" he cried.
This time it was the other man who replied.
"Cap'n Silver, sir, to come on board and
make terms," he shouted.
"Cap'n Silver! Don't know him. Who's he?"
cried the captain. And we could hear him add-
ing to himself: "'Cap'n, is it? My heart, and
here's promotion!"
Long John answered for himself.
"Me, sir. These poor lads have chosen me
cap'n after your desertion, sir"-laying a par-
ticular emphasis upon the word "desertion."
"We're willing to submit, if we can come to
terms, and no bones about it. All I ask is your
word, Cap'n Smollett, to let me safe and sound
out of this here stockade, and one minute to
get out o' shot before a gun is fired."
"My man," said Captain Smollett, "I have
not the slightest desire to talk to you. If you
wish to talk to me, you can come, that's all.
If there's any treachery, it'll be on your side,
and the Lord help you."
"That's enough, cap'n," shouted Long John,
Oo
oO
186 TREASURE ISLAND
cheerily. "A word from you's enough. I know
a gentleman, and you may lay to that."
We could see the man who carried the flag
of truce attempting to hold Silver back. Nor
was that wonderful, seeing how cavalier°® had
been the captain's answer. But Silver laughed
at him aloud, and slapped him on the back, as
if the idea of alarm had been absurd. Then he
advanced to the stockade, threw over his
crutch, got a leg up, and with great vigour and
skill succeeded in surmounting the fence and
dropping safely to the other side.
I will confess that I was far too much taken
up with what was going on to be of the slight-
est use as sentry; indeed, I had already de-
serted my eastern loophole, and crept up behind
the captain, who had now seated himself on
the threshold, with his elbows on his knees,
his head in his hands, and his eyes fixed on the
water, as it bubbled out of the old iron kettle
in the sand. He was whistling to himself,
"Come, Lasses and Lads."
Silver had terrible hard work getting up the
knoll. What with the steepness of the incline,
the thick tree stumps, and the soft sand, he
and his crutch were as helpless as a ship in
stays. But he stuck to it like a man in silence,
and at last arrived before the captain, whom
he saluted in the handsomest style. He was
SILVER's EMBASSY. 187
tricked out in his best; an immense blue coat,
thick with brass buttons, hung as low as to
his knees, and a fine laced hat was set on the
back of his head.
"Here you are, my man," said the captain,
raising his head. "You had better sit down."
"You ain't a-going to let me inside, cap'n?"
complained Long John. "It's a main cold morn-
ing, to be sure, sir, to sit outside upon the
sand."
"Why, Silver," said the captain, "if you had ,
pleased to be an honest man, you might have
been sitting in your galley. It's your own do-
ing. You're either my ship's cook-and then
you were treated handsome-or Cap'n Silver, a
common mutineer and pirate, and then you can
go hang!"
"Well, well, cap'n,"' returned the sea cook,
sitting down as he was bidden on the sand,
"you'll have to give me a hand up again, that's
all. A sweet pretty place you have of it here.
Ah, there's Jim! The top of the morning to
you, Jim.-Doctor, here's my service. Why,
there you all are together like a happy family,
in a manner of speaking."
"Tf you have anything to say, my man, bet-
ter say it," said the captain.
"Right you were, Cap'n Smollett," replied
Silver. ""Dooty is dooty, to be sure. Well, now,
ON
188 TREASURE ISLAND
you look here, that was a good lay of yours
last night. I don't deny it was a good lay. Some
of you pretty handy with a handspike-end.
And [ll not deny neither but what some of my
people was shook-maybe all was shook; may-
be I was shook myself; maybe that's why ?m
here for terms. But you mark me, cap'n, it
won't do twice, by thunder! We'll have to do
sentry-go, and ease off a point or so on the
19 rum. Maybe you think we were all a sheet in
the wind's eye. But [ll tell you I was sober;
I was on'y dog tired; and if I'd awoke a second
sooner I'd 'a' caught you at the act, I would.
He wasn't dead when I got round to him, not
15 he,"
"Welle" says Captain Smollett, as cool as
can be. |
All that Silver said was a riddle to him, but
you would never have guessed it from his tone.
20 As for me, I began to have an inkling. Ben
Gunn's last words came back to my mind. I
began to suppose that he had paid the buc-
caneers a visit while they all lay drunk together
round their fire, and I reckoned up with glee
that we had only fourteen enemies to deal with.
"Well, here it is," said Silver. "We want
that treasure, and we'll have it-that's our
point! You would just as soon save your lives,
I reckon; and that's yours. You have a chart,
30 haven't you?"
ol
2 oO
SILVER'S EMBASSY 189
"That's as may be," replied the captain.
"Oh, well, you have, I know that," returned
Long John. "You needn't be so husky with a
man; there ain't a particle of service in that,
and you may lay to it. What I mean is, we
want your chart. Now, I never meant you no
harm, myself."
"That won't do with me, my man," inter-
rupted the captain. "We know exactly what
you meant to do, and we don't care; for now,
you see, you can't do it."
And the captain looked at him calmly, and
proceeded to fill a pipe.
"Tf Abe Gray-" Silver broke out.
"Avast there!" cried Mr. Smollett. "Gray
told me nothing, and I asked him nothing; and
what's more I would see you and him and this
whole island blown clean out of the water into
blazes first. So there's my mind for you, my
man, on that."
This little whiff of temper seemed to cool
Silver down. He had been growing nettled be-
fore, but now he pulled himself together.
"Like enough," said he. "I would set no lim-
its to what gentlemen might consider shipshape,
or might not, as the case were. And, seein' as
how you are about to take a pipe, cap'n, I'll
make so free as to do likewise."
And he filled a pipe and lighted it; and the
two men sat silently smoking for quite a while,
o
1 Co
190 TREASURE ISLAND
now looking each other in the face, now stop-
ping their tobacco, now leaning forward to
spit. It was as good as the play to see them.
"Now," resumed Silver, "here it is. You give
us the chart to get the treasure by, and drop
shooting poor seamen, and stoving of their
heads in while asleep. You do that, and we'll
offer you a choice. Either you come aboard
along of us, once the treasure shipped, and then
Tll give you my affy-davy, upon my word of
honour, to clap you somewhere safe ashore.
Or, if that ain't to your fancy, some of my
hands being rough, and having old scores, on
account of hazing, then you can stay here, you
can. We'll divide stores with you, man for man;
and I'll give my affy-davy, as before, to speak
the first ship I sight, and send 'em here to
pick you up. Now you'll own that's talking.
Handsomer you couldn't look to get, not you.
And I hope'-raising his voice-"that all
hands in this here block-house will overhaul
my words, for what is spoke to one is spoke
to all."
Captain Smollett rose from his seat, and
knocked out the ashes of his pipe in the palm
of his left hand.
"Ts that all?" he asked.
"Every last word, by thunder!" answered
John. 'Refuse that, and you've seen the last
of me but musket-balls."
WARWICIR GOBLE
Srtver's EMBASSY
SILVER'S EMBASSY 193
"Very good," said the captain. '""Now you'll
hear me. If you'll come up one by one, un-
armed, I'll engage to clap you all in irons, and
take you home to a fair trial in England. If
you won't, my name is Alexander Smollett, Pve
flown my sovereign's colours, and I'll see you
all to Davy Jones.° You can't find the treas-
ure. You can't sail the ship-there's not a man
among you fit to sail the ship. You can't fight
us-Gray, there, got away from five of you.
Your ship's in irons, Master Silver; you're on
a lee shore, and so you'll find. I stand here
and tell you so; and they're the last good words
you'll get from me; for, in the name of heav-
en, [ll put a bullet in your back when next I
meet you. Tramp, my lad. Bundle out of this,
please, hand over hand, and double quick."
Silver's face was a picture; his eyes started
in his head with wrath. He shook the fire out
of his pipe.
"Give me a hand up!" he cried.
"Not I," returned the captain.
"Who'll give me a hand up?" he roared.
Not a man among us moved. Growling the
foulest imprecations, he crawled along the sand
till he got hold of the porch and could hoist
himself again upon his crutch. Then he spat
into the spring.
"There!" he cried, "that's what I think of
ye. Before an hour's out, Ill stove in your old
or
i mas
bo 5
194 TREASURE ISLAND
block-house like a rum puncheon. Laugh, by
thunder, laugh! Before an hour's out, ye'll
laugh upon the oe side. Them that die'll
be the lucky ones.'
5 And with a dreadful oath he stumbled off,
ploughed down the sand, was helped across the
stockade, after four or five failures, by the
man with the flag of truce, and disappeared in
an instant afterwards among the trees.
CHAPTER XXI
Tue ATTACK
As soon as Silver disappeared, the captain,
who had been closely watching him, turned
towards the interior of the house, and found
not a man of us at his post but Gray. It was
the first time we had ever seen him angry.
"Quarters!" he roared. And then, as we all
slunk back to our places, "Gray," he said, "Tl
put your name in the log; you've stood by your
duty like a seaman. Mr. Trelawney, I'm sur-
prised at you, sir. Doctor, I thought you had
worn the king's coat! If that was how you
served at Fontenoy, sir, you'd have been bet-
ter in your berth."
The doctor's watch were all back at their
loopholes, the rest were busy loading the spare
muskets, and every one with a red face, you
may be certain, and a flea in his ear, as the
saying is.
The captain looked on for a while in silence.
Then he spoke.
"My lads," said he, "I've given Silver a
broadside. I pitched it in red-hot on purpose;
and before the hour's out, as he said, we shall
be boarded. We're outnumbered, I needn't tell
1 oO
2 or
Igo J REASURE LOLAND
you that, but we fight in shelter; and, a min-
ute ago, I should have said we fought with dis-
cipline. I've no manner of doubt that we can
drub them, if you choose."
Then he went the rounds, and saw, as he
said, that all was clear.
On the two short sides of, the house, east
and west, there were only two loopholes; on
the south side where the porch was, two again;
and on the north side, five. There was a round
score of muskets for the seven of us; the fire-
wood had been built into four piles-tables,
you might say-one about the middle of each
side, and on each of these tables some ammu-
nition and four loaded muskets were laid ready
to the hand of the defenders. In the middle,
the cutlasses lay ranged.
"Toss out the fire," said the captain; "the
chill is past, and we mustn't have smoke in
our eyes."
The iron fire basket was carried bodily out
by Mr. Trelawney, and the embers smothered
among sand.
"Hawkins hasn't had his breakfast. Haw-
kins, help yourself, and back to your post to
eat it," continued Captain Smollett. "Lively,
now, my lad; you'll want it before you've done.
Hunter, serve out a round of brandy to all
hands."
And while this was going on, the captain
THe ATTACK 197
completed, in his own mind, the plan of the
defence.
"Doctor, you will take the door," he re-
sumed. "See, and don't expose yourself; keep
within, and fire through the porch. Hunter,
take the east side, there. Joyce, you stand by
the west. my man. Mr. Trelawney, you are
the best shot-you and Gray will take this long
north side, with the five loopholes; it's there.
the danger is. If they can get up to it, and fire
in upon us through our own ports, things
would begin to look dirty. Hawkins, neither
you nor I are much account at the shooting;
we'll stand by to load and bear a hand."
As the captain had said, the chill was past.
As soon as the sun had climbed above our
girdle of trees, it fell with all its force upon the
clearing, and drank up the vapours at a draught.
Soon the sand was baking, and the resin melt-
ing in the logs of the block-house. Jackets and
coats were flung aside; shirts thrown open at
the neck, and rolled up to the shoulders; and
we stood there, each at his post, in a fever
of heat and anxiety.
An hour passed away.
"Hang them!" said the captain. 'This is as
dull as the doldrums.° Gray, whistle for a
wind."
And just at that moment came the first news
of the attack.
bo oO
oO
1 Oo
190 AREASURDE LOLAINY
"Tf you please, sir," said Joyce, "if I see
anyone am I to fire?"
"T told you so!" cried the captain.
"Thank you, sir," returned Joyce, with the
same quiet civility.
Nothing followed for a time; but the re-
mark had set us all on the alert, straining ears
and eyes-the musketeers with their pieces bal-
anced in their hands, the captain out in the
middle of the block-house, with his mouth very
- tight and a frown on his face.
He A
So some seconds passed, till suddenly Joyce
whipped up his musket and fired. The report
had scarcely died away ere it was repeated and
repeated from without in a scattering volley,
shot behind shot, like a string of geese, from
every side of the enclosure. Several bullets
struck the log-house, but not one entered; and,
as the smoke cleared away and vanished, the
stockade and the woods around it looked as
quiet and empty as before. Not a bough waved,
not the gleam of a musket-barrel betrayed the
presence of our foes.
"Did you hit your man?" asked the captain.
"No, sir," replied Joyce. "I believe not, sir."
"Next best thing to tell the truth," muttered
Captain Smollett. "Load his gun, Hawkins.
How many should you say there were on your
side, doctor?"
"T know precisely," said Dr. Livesey. "Three
ase
& rope sl _ Lo i
<- it
Sie S "bh fe : ge i
a
Ze
Va 4 |
FR
= I
Tur ATTACK
LHE ATTACK 201
shots were fired on this side. I saw the three
flashes-two close together-one farther to the
west."
"Three!" repeated the captain. '""And how
many on yours, Mr. Trelawney?"
But this was not so easily answered. There
had come many from the north-seven, by the
squire's computation; eight or nine, according
to Gray. From the east and west only a single
shot had been fired. It was plain, therefore,
that the attack would be developed from the
north, and that on the other three sides we were
only to be annoyed by a show of hostilities. But
Captain Smollett made no change in his ar-
rangements. If the mutineers succeeded in
crossing the stockade, he argued, they would
take possession of any unprotected loophole,
and shoot us down like rats in our own strong-
hold.
Nor had we much time left to us for thought.
Suddenly, with a loud huzza, a little cloud of
pirates leaped from the woods on the north
side, and ran straight on the stockade. At the
same moment, the fire was once more opened
from the woods, and a rifle ball sang through
the doorway, and knocked the doctor's musket
into bits.
The boarders swarmed over the fence like
monkeys. Squire and Gray fired again and yet
again; three men fell, one forwards into the
202 'TREASURE ISLAND
enclosure, two back on the outside. But of
these, one was evidently more frightened than
hurt, for he was on his feet again in a crack,
and instantly disappeared among the trees.
Two had bit the dust, one had fled, four had
made good their footing inside our defences;
while from the shelter of the woods seven or
eight men, each evidently supplied with several
muskets, kept up a hot though useless fire on
10 the log-house. ;
The four who had boarded made straight
before them for the building, shouting as they
ran, and the men among the trees shouted back
to encourage them. Several shots were fired;
but, such was the hurry of the marksmen, not
one appears to have taken effect. In a moment,
the four pirates had swarmed up the mound
and were upon us.
The head of Job Anderson, the boatswain,
20 appeared at the middle loophole.
"At 'em, all hands-all hands!" he roared,
in a voice of thunder.
At the same moment, another pirate grasped
Hunter's musket by the muzzle, wrenched it
25 from his hands, plucked it through the loophole,
and, with one stunning blow, laid the poor fel-
low senseless on the floor. Meanwhile a third,
running unharmed all round the house, ap-
peared suddenly in the doorway, and fell with
30 his cutlass on the doctor.
oO
a oO
THE ATTACK 203
Our position was utterly reversed. A moment
since we were firing, under cover, at an exposed
enemy; now it was we who lay uncovered, and
could not return a blow.
The log-house was full of smoke, to which
we owed our comparative safety. Cries and con-
fusion, the flashes and reports of pistol shots,
and one loud groan, rang in my ears.
"Out, lads, out, and fight 'em in the open!
Cutlasses!" cried the captain.
I snatched a cutlass from the pile, and some-
one, at the same time snatching another, gave
me a cut across the knuckles which I hardly
felt. I dashed out of the door into the clear
sunlight. Someone was close behind, I knew not
whom. Right in front, the doctor was pursuing
his assailant down the hill, and, just as my eyes
fell upon him, beat down his guard, and sent
him sprawling on his back, with a great slash
across the face.
"Round the house, lads! round the house
cried the captain; and even in the hurly-burly
I perceived a change in his voice.
Mechanically, I obeyed, turned eastwards,
and with my cutlass raised, ran round the cor-
ner of the house. Next moment I was face to
face with Anderson. He roared aloud, and his
hanger® went up above his head, flashing in
the sunlight. I had not time to be afraid, but,
as the blow still hung impending, leaped in a
uo
Or
oO
= (Ot
204 TREASURE ISLAND
trice upon one side, and missing my foot in the
soft sand, rolled headlong down the slope.
When I had first sallied from the door, the
other mutineers had been already swarming
up the palisade to make an end of us. One
man, in a red night-cap, with his cutlass in his
mouth, had even got upon the top and thrown
a leg across. Well, so short had been the in-
terval, that when I found my feet again all
was in the same posture, the fellow with the
red night-cap still half way over, another still
just showing his head above the top of the
stockade. And yet, in this breath of time, the
fight was over, and the victory was ours.
Gray, following close behind me, had cut
down the big boatswain ere he had time to re-
cover from his lost blow. Another had been shot
at a loophole in the very act of firing into the
house, and now lay in agony, the pistol still
smoking in his hand. A third, as I had seen,
the doctor had disposed of at a blow. Of the
four who had scaled the palisade, one only re-
mained unaccounted for, and he, having left his
cutlass on the field, was now clambering out
again with the fear of death upon him.
"Fire-fire from the house!" cried the doc-
tor. "And you, lads, back into cover."
But his words were unheeded, no shot was
fired, and the last boarder made good his es-
30 cape, and disappeared with the rest into the
THE ATTACK 205
wood. In three seconds nothing remained of the
attacking party but the five who had fallen,
four on the inside, and one on the outside, of
the palisade.
The doctor and Gray and I ran full speed
for shelter. The survivors would soon be back
where they had left their muskets, and at any
moment the fire might recommence.
The house was by this time somewhat cleared
of smoke, and we saw at a glance the price we
had paid for victory. Hunter lay beside his
loophole, stunned; Joyce by his, shot through
the head, never to move again; while right in
the centre, the squire was supporting the cap-
tain, one as pale as the other.
"The captain's wounded," said Mr. Tre-
lawney.
"Have they run?" asked Mr. Smollett.
"All that could, you may be bound," re-
turned the doctor; "but there's five of them
will never run again."
"Five!" cried the captain. ""Come, that's bet-
ter. Five against three leaves us four to nine.
That's better odds than we had at starting.
We were seven to nineteen then, or thought
we were, and that's as bad to bear." *
'The mutineers were soon only eight in number, for the
man shot by Mr. Trelawney on board the schooner died
that same evening of his wound. But this was, of course,
not known till after by the faithful party.
Or
or
PART V
a2 MY SEA ADVENTURE
P Spe Mae a Fs '
CHAPTER XXII
How My Sra ADVENTURE BEGAN
THERE was no return of the mutineers-not
so much as another shot out of the woods. They
had "got their rations for that day," as the cap-
tain put it, and we had the place to ourselves
and a quiet time to overhaul the wounded and
get dinner. Squire and I cooked outside in spite
of the danger, and even outside we could hardly
tell what we were at, for horror of the loud
groans that reached us from the doctor's pa-
tients.
Out of the eight men who had fallen in the
action, only three still breathed-that one of
the pirates who had been shot at the loophole,
Hunter, and Captain Smollett; and of these
the first two were as good as dead; the muti-
neer, indeed, died under the doctor's knife, and
. Hunter, do what we could, never recovered con-
sciousness in this world. He lingered all day,
breathing loudly like the old buccaneer at home
in his apoplectic fit; but the bones of his chest
had been crushed by the blow and his skull
fractured in falling, and some time in the fol-
lowing night, without sign or sound, he went
to his Maker.
210 TREASURE ISLAND
As for the captain, his wounds were grievous
indeed, but not dangerous. No organ was fa-
tally injured. Anderson's ball-for it was Job
that shot him first-had broken his shoulder-
blade and touched the lung, not badly; the sec-
ond had only torn and displaced some muscles
in the calf. He was sure to recover, the doctor
said, but, in the meantime and for weeks to
come, he must not walk nor move his arm,
10 nor so much as speak when he could help it.
My own accidental cut across the knuckles
was a fleabite. Dr. Livesey patched it up with
plaster, and pulled my ears for me into the bar-
gain.
15 After dinner the squire and the doctor sat
by the captain's side a while in consultation;
and when they had talked to their heart's con-
tent, it being then a little past noon, the doctor
took up his hat and pistols, girt on a cutlass,
put the chart in his pocket, and with a musket
over his shoulder, crossed the palisade on the
north side, and set off briskly through the trees.
Gray and I were sitting together at the far
end of the block-house, to be out of earshot
of our officers consulting; and Gray took his
pipe out of his mouth and fairly forgot to put
it back again, so thunder-struck he was at this
occurrence.
"Why, in the name of Davy Jones," said he,
30 "is Dr. Livesey mad?"
oO
[-) 2
ot 2
How My SEA ADVENTURE BEGAN 211
"Why, no," says I. "He's about the last of
this crew for that, I take it."
"Well, shipmate," said Gray, "mad he may
not be; but if e's not, you mark my words,
I am."
"T take it,' replied I, "the doctor has his
idea; and if I am right, he's going now to see
Ben Gunn."
I was right, as appeared later; but, in the
meantime, the house being stifling hot, and the
little patch of sand inside the palisade ablaze
with midday sun, I began to get another
thought into my head, which was not by any
means so right. What I began to do was to envy
the doctor, walking in the cool shadow of the
woods, with the birds about him, and the pleas-
ant smell of the pines, while I sat grilling, with
my clothes stuck to the hot resin, and so much
blood about me, and so many poor dead bodies
lying all around, that I took a disgust of the
place that was almost as strong as fear.
All the time I was washing out the block-
house, and then washing up the things from
dinner, this disgust and envy kept growing
stronger and stronger, till at last, being near a
bread-bag, and no one then observing me, I
took the first step towards my escapade, and
filled both pockets of my coat with biscuit.
I was a fool, if you like, and certainly I was
going to do a foolish, over-bold act; but I was
oo i]
ol
oO 2
DTD TREASURE ISLAND
determined to do it with all the precautions in
my power. These biscuits, should anything be-
fall me, would keep me, at least, from starving
till far on in the next day.
The next thing I laid hold of was a brace of
pistols, and as I already had a powder-horn
and bullets, I felt myself well supplied with
arms.
As for the scheme I had in my head, it was
not a bad one in itself. I was to go down the
sandy spit that divides the anchorage on the
east from the open sea, find the white rock I
had observed last evening, and ascertain
whether it was there or not that Ben Gunn had
hidden his boat; a thing quite worth doing, as
I still believe. But as I was certain I should
not be allowed to leave the enclosure, my only
plan was to take French leave,° and slip out
when nobody was watching; and that was so
bad a way of doing it as made the thing itself
wrong. But I was only a boy, and I had made
my mind up.
Well, as things at last fell out, I found an
admirable opportunity. The squire and Gray
were busy helping the captain with his ban-
dages; the coast was clear; I made a bolt for
it over the stockade and into the thickest of
the trees, and before my absence was observed
I was out of cry of my companions.
This was my second folly, far worse than the
How My SEA ADVENTURE BEGAN 213
first, as I left but two sound men to guard the
house; but like the first, it was a help towards
saving all of us. _
I took my way straight for the east coast of
the island, for I was determined to go down
the seaside of the spit to avoid all chance of ob-
servation from the anchorage. It was already
late in the afternoon, although still warm and
sunny. As I continued to thread the tall woods
I could hear from far before me not only the
continuous thunder of the surf, but a certain
tossing of foliage and grinding of boughs which
showed me the sea breeze had set in higher than
usual. Soon cool draughts of air began to reach
me; and a few steps farther I came forth into
the open borders of the grove, and saw the sea
lying blue and sunny to the horizon, and the
surf tumbling and tossing its foam along the
beach.
I have never seen the sea quiet round Treas-
ure Island. The sun might blaze overhead, the
air be without a breath, the surface smooth and
blue, but still these great rollers would be run-
ning along all the external coast, thundering
and thundering by day and night; and I scarce
believe there is one spot in the island where a
man would be out of earshot of their noise.
I walked along beside the surf with great en-
joyment, till, thinking I was now got far enough
to the south, I took the cover of some thick :
ot
On 1
2 i)
214 TREASURE ISLAND
bushes, ana crept warily up to the ridge of the
spit.
Behind me was the sea, in front the anchor-
age. The sea breeze, as though it had the soon-
er blown itself out by its unusual violence, was
already at an end; it had been succeeded by
light, variable airs from the south and south-
east, carrying great banks of fog; and the an-
chorage, under lee of Skeleton Island, lay still
and leaden as when first we entered it. The
Hispaniola, in that unbroken mirror, was ex-
actly portrayed from the truck to the water
line, the Jolly Roger hanging from her peak.
Alongside lay one of the gigs, Silver in the
stern-sheets-him I could always recognise-
while a couple of men were leaning over the
stern bulwarks, one of them with a red cap-
the very rogue that I had seen some hours be-
fore stride-legs upon the palisade. Apparently
they were talking and laughing, though at that
distance-upwards of a mile-I could, of
course, hear no word of what was said. All at
once, there began the most horrid, unearthly
screaming, which at first startled me badly,
though I had soon remembered the voice of
Captain Flint, and even thought I could make
out the bird by her bright plumage as she sat:
perched upon her master's wrist.
Soon after the jolly-boat shoved off and
pulled for shore, and the man with the red cap
How My Sra ADVENTURE BEGAN) 215
and his comrade went below by the cabin
companion.
Just about the same time the sun had gone
down behind the Spyglass, and as the fog was
collecting rapidly, it began to grow dark in
earnest. I saw I must lose no time if I were
to find the boat that evening.
The white rock, visible enough above the
brush, was still some eighth of a mile farther
down the spit, and it took me a goodish while
to get up with it, crawling, often on all fours,
among the scrub. Night had almost come when
I laid my hand on its rough sides. Right below
it there was an exceedingly small hollow of
green turf, hidden by banks and a thick under-
wood about knee-deep, that grew there very
plentifully; and in the centre of the dell, sure
enough, a little tent of goat-skins, like what
the gipsies carry about with them in England.
I dropped into the hollow, lifted the side of
the tent, and there was Ben Gunn's boat-
home-made if ever anything was home-made:
a rude, lop-sided framework of tough wood,
and stretched upon that a covering of goat-skin,
with the hair inside. The thing was extremely
small, even for me, and I can hardly imagine
that it could have floated with a full-sized man.
There was one thwart set as low as possible,
a kind of stretcher in the bows, and a double
paddle for propulsion.
o
Hw 0
tb 0
to oO
oO
Or at
216 TREASURE ISLAND
I had not then seen a coracle,° such as the
ancient Britons made, but I have seen one
since, and I can give you no fairer idea of Ben
Gunn's boat than by saying it was like the
first and the worst coracle ever made by man.
But the great advantage of the coracle it cer-
tainly possessed, for it was exceedingly light
and portable.
Well, now that I had found the boat, you
would have thought I had had enough of tru-
antry for once; but, in the meantime, I had
taken another notion, and become so obsti-
nately fond of it, that I would have carried it
out, I believe, in the teeth of Captain Smollett
himself. This was to slip out under cover of
the night, cut the Hispaniola adrift, and let her
go ashore where she fancied. I had quite made
up my mind that the mutineers, after their
repulse of the morning, had nothing nearer
their hearts than to up anchor and away
to sea; this, I thought, it would be a fine thing
to prevent; and now that I had seen how they
left their watchmen unprovided with a boat, I
thought it might be done with little risk.
Down I sat to wait for darkness, and made
a hearty meal of biscuit. It was a night out of
ten thousand for my purpose. The fog had
now buried all heaven. As the last rays of day-
light dwindled and disappeared, absolute
blackness settled down on Treasure Island.
How My SEA ADVENTURE BEGAN 217
And when, at last, I shouldered the coracle,
and groped my way stumblingly out of the hol-
low where I had supped, there were but two
points visible on the whole anchorage.
One was the great fire on shore, by which the
defeated pirates lay carousing in the swamp.
The other, a mere blur of light upon the dark-
ness, indicated the position of the anchored
ship. She had swung round to the ebb-her bow
was now towards me-the only lights on board
were in the cabin; and what I saw was merely
a reflection on the fog of the strong rays that
flowed from the stern window.
The ebb had already run some time, and I
had to wade through a long belt of swampy
sand, where I sank several times above the
ankle, before I came to the edge of the retreat-
ing water, and wading a little way in, with
some strength and dexterity, set my coracle,
keel downwards, on the surface.
oO
oO
joes or
CHAPTER XXIII
THE Exps-TiIpE RUNS
Tue coracle-as I had ample reason to know
before I was done with her-was a very safe
boat for a person of my height and weight, both
buoyant and clever in a seaway; but she was
the most cross-grained, lop-sided craft to man-
age. Do as you pleased, she always made more
leeway than anything else, and turning round
and round was the manceuvre she was best at.
Even Ben Gunn himself has admitted that she
was "queer to handle till you knew her way."
Certainly I did not know her way. She
turned in every direction but the one I was
bound to go; the most part of the time we were
broadside on, and [ am very sure I never should
5 have made the ship at all but for the tide. By
good fortune, paddle as I pleased, the tide was
still sweeping me down; and there lay the His-
paniola right in the fair way, hardly to be
missed.
First she loomed before me like a blot of
something yet blacker than darkness, then her
spars and hull began to take shape, and the
next moment, as it seemed (for, the further I
THE Exss-Tin-e Runs 219
went, the brisker grew the current of the ebb),
I was alongside of her hawser, and had laid
hold.
The hawser was as taut as a bowstring, and
the current so strong she pulled upon her an-
chor. All round the hull, in the blackness, the
rippling current bubbled and chattered like a
little mountain stream. One cut with my sea-
gully, and the Hispaniola would go humming
down the tide.
So far so good; but it next occurred to my
recollection that a taut hawser, suddenly cut,
is a thing as dangerous as a kicking horse. Ten
to one, if I were so foolhardy as to cut the His-
paniola from her anchor, I and the coracle
would be knocked clean out of the water.
This brought me to a full stop, and if for-
tune had not again particularly favoured me, I
should have had to abandon my design. But
the light airs which had begun blowing from
the south-east and south had hauled round
after nightfall into the south-west. Just while I
was meditating, a puff came, caught the His-
paniola, and forced her up into the current;
and to my great joy, I felt the hawser slacken
in my grasp, and the hand by which I held it
dip for a second under water.
With that I made my mind up, took out my
gully, opened it with my teeth, and cut one
strand after another, till the vessel swung only
oO
Lo)
[at)
was
220 TREASURE ISLAND
by two. Then I lay quiet, waiting to sever these
last when the strain should be once more light-
ened by a breath of wind.
All this time I had heard the sound of loud
5 voices from the cabin; but, to say truth, my
mind had been so entirely taken up with other
thoughts that I had scarcely given ear. Now,
however, when I had nothing else to do, I be-
gan to pay more heed.
10 One I recognised for the coxswain's, Israel
Hands, that had been Flint's gunner in former
days. The other was, of course, my friend of
the red night-cap. Both men were plainly the
worse for drink, and they were still drinking;
-15 for, even while I was listening, one of them,
with a drunken cry, opened the stern window
and threw out something, which I divined to
be an empty bottle. But they were not only
tipsy; it was plain that they were furiously
20 angry. Oaths flew like hailstones, and every
now and then there came forth such an explo-
sion as I thought was sure to end in blows. But
each time the quarrel passed off, and the voices
grumbled lower for a while, until the next crisis
25 came, and, in its turn, passed away without
result.
On shore, I could see the glow of the great
camp fire burning warmly through the shore-
side trees. Someone was singing, a dull, old,
30 droning sailor's song, with a droop and a qua-
Tue Ess-Tive Runs PII
ver at the ent! of every verse, and seemingly
no end to it at all but the patience of the singer.
I had heard it on the voyage more than once,
and remembered these words:-
"But one man of her crew alive,
What put to sea with seventy-five."
And I thought,it was a ditty rather too dole-
fully appropriate for a company that had met
such cruel losses in the morning. But, indeed,
from what I saw, all these buccaneers were as
callous as the sea they sailed on.
At last the breeze came; the schooner sidled
and drew nearer in the dark; I felt the hawser
slacken once more, and with a good, tough ef-
fort, cut the last fibres through.
The breeze had but little action on the cor-
acle, and I was almost instantly swept against
the bows of the Hispaniola. At the same time
the schooner began to turn upon her heel, spin-
ning slowly, end for end, across the current.
I wrought like a fiend, for I expected every
moment to be swamped; and since I found I
could not push the coracle directly off, I now
shoved straight astern. At length I was clear
of my dangerous neighbour; and just as I gave
the last impulsion, my hands came across a
light cord that was trailing overboard across
the stern bulwarks. Instantly I grasped it.
Why I should have done so I can hardly say.
on
bo ot
1 Oo
1 Oo
222 TREASURE ISLAND
It was at first mere instinct; but once I had
it in my hands and found it fast, curiosity be-
gan to get the upper hand, and I determined
I should have one look through the cabin win-
dow.
I pulled in hand over hand on the cord, and,
when I judged myself near enough, rose at in-
finite risk to about half my height, and thus
commanded the roof and a slice of the interior
of the cabin.
By this time the schooner and her little con-
sort were gliding pretty swiftly through the
water; indeed, we had already fetched up level
with the camp fire. The ship was talking, as
sailors say, loudly, treading the innumerable
ripples with an incessant weltering splash; and
until I gotymy eye above the window -sill I could
not comprehend why the watchmen had taken
no alarm. One glance, however, was sufficient;
and it was only one glance that I durst take
from that unsteady skiff. It showed me Hands
and his companion locked together in deadly
wrestle, each with a hand upon the other's
throat.
I dropped upon the thwart again, none too
soon, for I was near overboard. I could see
nothing for the moment but these two furious,
encrimsoned faces, swaying together under the
smoky lamp; and I shut my eyes to let them
grow once more familiar with the darkness.
THE Exss-Tip-e RuNS 223
The endless ballad had come to an end at
last, and the whole diminished company about
the camp fire had broken into the chorus I had
heard so often:-
"Fifteen men on the dead man's chest-
Yo-ho-ho, and a bottle of rum!
Drink and the devil had done for the rest-
Yo-ho-ho, and a bottle of rum!"
I was just thinking how busy drink and the
devil were at that very moment in the cabin of
the Hispaniola, when I was surprised by a sud-
den lurch of the coracle. At the same moment
she yawed sharply and seemed to change her
course. The speed in the meantime had strange-
ly increased.
I opened my eyes at once. All round me were
little ripples, combing over with a sharp, bris-
tling' sound and slightly phosphorescent. The
Hispaniola herself, a few yards in whose wake
I was still being whirled along, seemed to stag-
ger in her course, and I saw her spars toss a
little against the blackness of the night; nay,
as I looked longer, I made sure she also was
wheeling to the southward.
I glanced over my shoulder, and my heart
jumped against my ribs. There, right behind
me, was the glow of the camp fire. The current
had turned at right angles, sweeping round
along with it the tall schooner and the little
or
oO
224 TREASURE ISLAND
dancing coracle; ever quickening, ever bubbling
higher, ever muttering louder, it went spinning
through the narrows for the open sea.
Suddenly the schooner in front of me gave
a violent yaw, turning, perhaps, through twenty
degrees; and almost at the same moment one
shout followed another from on board; I could
hear feet pounding on the companion ladder;
and I knew that the two drunkards had at last
been interrupted in their quarrel and awakened
to a sense of their disaster.
I lay down fiat in the bottom of that
wretched skiff, and devoutly recommended my
spirit to its Maker. At the end of the straits, I
made sure we must fall into some bar of rag-
ing breakers, where all my troubles would be
ended speedily; and though I could, perhaps,
bear to die, I could not. bear to look upon my
fate as it approached.
So I must have lain for hours, continually
beaten to and fro upon the billows, now and
again wetted with flying sprays, and never ceas-
ing to expect death at the next plunge. Gradu-
ally weariness grew upon me; a numbness, an
occasional stupor, fell upon my mind even in
the midst of my terrors; until sleep at last su-
pervened, and in my sea-tossed coracle I lay
and dreamed of home and the old "Admiral
Benbow."
CHAPTER XXIV
THE CRUISE OF THE CORACLE
Ir was broad day when I awoke, and found
myself tossing at the south-west end of Treas-
ure Island. The sun was up, but was still hid
from me behind the great bulk of the Spyglass,
which on this side descended almost to the sea
in formidable cliffs.
Haulbowline Head and Mizzen-mast Hill
were at my elbow; the hill bare and dark, the
head bound with cliffs forty or fifty feet high, ©
and fringed with great masses of fallen rock.
I was scarce a quarter of a mile to seaward,
and it was my first thought to paddle in and
land.
That notion was soon given over. Among the
fallen rocks the breakers spouted and _ bel-
lowed; loud reverberations, heavy sprays flying
and falling, succeeded one another from second
to second; and I saw myself, if I ventured
nearer, dashed to death upon the rough shore,
or spending my strength in vain to scale the
beetling crags.
Nor was that all; for crawling together on
flat tables of rock, or letting themselves drop
into the sea with loud reports, I beheld huge
ms
226 TREASURE ISLAND
slimy monsters-soft snails, as it were, of in-
credible bigness-two or three score of them
together, making the rocks to echo with their
barkings.
I have understood since that they were sea-
lions, and entirely harmless. But the look of
them, added to the difficulty of the shore and
the high running of the surf, was more than
enough to disgust me of that landing place. I
felt willing rather to starve at sea than to con-
front such perils.
In the meantime I had a better chance, as I
supposed, before me. North of Haulbowline
Head, the land runs in a long way, leaving, at
low tide, a long stretch of yellow sand. To the
north of that, again, there comes another cape
-Cape of the Woods, as it was marked upon
the chart-buried in tall green pines, which
descended to the margin of the sea.
I remembered what Silver had said about the
current that sets northward along the whole
west coast of Treasure Island; and seeing from
my position that I was already under its influ-
ence, I preferred to leave Haulbowline Head
behind me, and reserve my strength for an at-
tempt to land upon the kindlier-looking Cape
of the Woods.
There was a great, smooth swell upon the
sea. The wind blowing steady and gentle from
30 the south, there was no contrariety between
or
1 Oo
iL oO
or 2
THE CRUISE OF THE CORACLE ao)
that and the current, and the billows rose and
fell unbroken.
Had it been otherwise, I must long ago have
perished; but as it was, it is surprising how
easily and securely my little and light boa:
could ride. Often, as I still lay at the bottom,
and kept no more than an eye above the gun-
wale, I would see a big blue summit heaving
close above me; yet the coracle would but
bounce a little, dance as if on springs, and
subside on the other side into the trough as
lightly as a bird.
I began after a little to grow very bold, and
sat up to try my skill at paddling. But even a
small change in the disposition of the weight
will produce violent changes in the behaviour
of a coracle. And I had hardly moved before
the boat, giving up at once her gentle dancing
movement, ran straight down a slope of water
so steep that it made me giddy, and struck her 2
nose, with a spout of spray, deep into the side
of the next wave.
I was drenched and terrified, and fell in-
stantly back into my old position, whereupon
the coracle seemed to find her head again, and
led me as softly as before among the billows.
It was plain she was not to be interfered with,
and at that rate, since I could in no way in-
fluence her course, what hope had I left of
reaching land?
0 He
oO
ol ib
228 TREASURE ISLAND
I began to be horribly frightened, but I kept
my head, for all that. First, moving with all
care, I gradually baled out the coracle with
my sea-cap; then getting my eye once more
above the gunwale, I set myself to study how
it was she managed to slip so quietly through
the rollers.
I found each wave, instead of the big, smooth,
glossy mountain it looks from shore, or from
a vessel's deck, was for all the world like any
range of hills on the dry land, full of peaks and
smooth places and valleys. The coracle, left to
herself, turning from side to side, threaded, so
to speak, her way through these lower parts,
and avoided the steep slopes and higher, top-
pling summits of the wave.
'"Well, now," thought I to myself, "it is plain
I must lie where I am, and not disturb the bal-
ance; but it is.plain, also, that I can put the
paddle over the side, and from time to time, in
smooth places, give her a shove or two towards
land." No sooner thought upon than done.
There I lay on my elbows, in the most trying
attitude, and every now and again gave a weak
stroke or two to turn her head to shore.
It was very tiring, and slow work, yet I did
visibly gain ground; and, as we drew near the
Cape of the Woods, though I saw I must infal-
libly miss that point, I had still made some
hundred yards of easting. I was, indeed, close
THE CRUISE OF THE CORACLE 229
in. I could see the cool, green tree-tops swaying
together in the breeze, and I felt sure I should
make the next promontory without fail.
It was high time, for I now began to be tor-
tured with thirst. The glow of the sun from
above, its thousand-fold reflection from the
waves, the sea-water that fell and dried upon
me, caking my very lips with salt, combined
to make my throat burn and my brain ache.
The sight of the trees so near at hand had al-
most made me sick with longing; but the cur-
rent had soon carried me past the point; and,
as the next reach of sea opened out, I beheld
a sight that changed the nature of my thoughts.
Right in front of me, not half a mile away,
I beheld the Hispaniola under sail. I made sure,
of course, that I should be taken, but I was so
distressed for want of water, that I scarce knew
whether to be glad or sorry at the thought;
and, long before I had come to a conclusion,
surprise had taken entire possession of my
mind, and I could do nothing but stare and
wonder.
The Hispaniola was under her main-sail and
two jibs, and the beautiful white canvas shone
in the sun like snow or silver. When I first
sighted her, all her sails were drawing; she was
laying a course about north-west; and I pre-
sumed the men on board were going round the
island on their way back to the anchorage.
al
Or
oO
2 ot
230 TREASURE ISLAND
Presently she began to fetch more and more to
the westward, so that I thought they had
sighted me and were going about in chase. At
last, however, she fell right into the wind's eye,
was taken dead aback, and stood there a while
helpless, with her sails shivering.
"Clumsy fellows," said I; "they must still
be drunk as owls." And I thought how Captain
Smollett would have set them skipping.
Meanwhile, the schooner gradually fell off,
end filled again upon another tack, sailed
swiftly for a minute or so, and brought up once
more dead in the wind's eye. Again and again
\vas this repeated. To and fro, up and down,
north, south, east and west, the Hispaniola
sailed by swoops and dashes, and at each repe-
tition ended as she had begun, with idly flap-
ping canvas. It became plain to me that no-
body was steering. And, if so, where were the
men? Either they were dead drunk, or had
deserted her, I thought, and perhaps if I could
get on board, I might return the vessel to her
captain.
The current was bearing coracle and schoon-
er southward at an equal rate. As for the lat-
ter's sailing, it was so wild and intermittent,
and she hung each time so long in irons, that
she certainly gained nothing, if she did not even
lose. If only I dared to sit up and paddle, I
30 made sure that I could overhaul her. The
THE CRUISE OF THE CORACLE 231
scheme had an air of adventure that inspired
me, and the thought of the water breaker be-
side the fore companion doubled my growing
courage.
Up I got, was welcomed almost instantly by
another cloud of spray, but this time stuck to
my purpose; and set myself, with all my
strength and caution, to paddle after the un-
steered Hispaniola. Once I shipped a sea so
heavy that I had to stop and bale, with my
heart fluttering like a bird; but gradually I
got into the way of the thing, and guided my
coracle among the waves, with only now and
then a blow upon her bows and a dash of foam
in my face.
I was now gaining rapidly on the schooner;
I could see the brass glisten on the tiller as it
banged about; and still no soul appeared upon
her decks. I could not choose but suppose she
was deserted. If not, the men were lying drunk
below, where I might batten them down, per-
haps, and do what I chose with the ship.
For some time she had been doing the worst
thing possible for me-standing still. She
headed nearly due south, yawing, of course, all
the time. Each time she fell off her sails partly
filled, and these brought her, in a moment,
right to the wind again. I have said this was the
worst thing possible for me; for helpless as she
looked in this situation, with the canvas crack-
or
no S
nw Or
oOo
1 -)
232 TREASURE ISLAND
ing like cannon, and the blocks trundling and
banging on the deck, she still continued to run
away from me, not only with the speed of the
current, but by the whole amount of her lee-
way, which was naturally great. .
But now, at last, I had my chance. The
breeze fell, for some seconds, very low, and the
current gradually turning her, the Hispaniola
revolved slowly round her centre, and at last
presented me her stern, with the cabin window
still gaping open, and the lamp over the table
still burning on into the day. The main-sail
hung drooped like a banner. She was stock-still,.
but for the current.
For the last little while I had even lost; but
now, redoubling my efforts, I began once more
to overhaul the chase.
I was not a hundred yards from her when
the wind came again in a clap; she filled on the
port tack, and was off again, stooping and skim-
ming like a swallow.
My first impulse was one of despair, but my
second was towards joy. Round she came, till
she was broadside on to me-round still till she
had covered a half, then two-thirds, and then
three-quarters of the distance that separated
us. I could see the waves boiling white under
her forefoot. Immensely tall she looked to me
from my low station in the coracle.
And then, of a sudden, I began to compre-
Tue CRUISE OF THE CORACLE
THE CRUISE OF THE CORACLE 235
hend. I had scarce time to think-scarce time
to act and save myself. I was on the summit of
one swell when the schooner came stooping over
the next. The bowsprit was over my head. I
sprang to my feet, and leaped, stamping the
coracle under water. With one hand I caught
the jib-boom,° while my foot was lodged be-
tween the stay and the brace; and as [ still
clung there panting, a dull blow told me that
the schooner had charged down upon and
struck the coracle, and that I was left without
retreat on the Hispaniola.
oO
Oo
oO
o
CHAPTER XXV
I STRIKE THE JOLLY ROGER
I HAD scarce gained a position on the bow-
sprit, when the flying jib flapped and filled
upon the other tack, with a report like a gun.
The schooner trembled to her keel under the re-
verse; but next moment, the other sails still
drawing, the jib flapped back again, and hung
idle.
This had nearly tossed me off into the sea;
and now [I lost no time, crawled back along the
bowsprit, and tumbled head foremost on the
deck.
I was on the lee side of the forecastle, and
the main-sail, which was still drawing, con-
cealed from me a certain portion of the after-
deck. Not a soul was to be seen. The planks,
which had not been swabbed since the mutiny,
bore the print of many feet; and an empty
bottle, broken by the neck, tumbled to and fro
like a live thing in the scuppers.
Suddenly the Hispaniola came right into the
wind. The jibs behind me cracked aloud; the
rudder slammed to; the whole ship gave a sick-
ening heave and shudder, and at the same mo-
I STRIKE THE JOLLY ROGER 237
ment the main-boom swung inboard, the sheet
groaning in the blocks, and showed me the lee
after-deck.
There were the two watchmen, sure enough:
red-cap on his back, as stiff as a handspike,
with his arms stretched out like those of a cru-
cifix, and his teeth showing through his open
lips; Israel Hands propped against the bul-
warks, his chin on his chest, his hands lying
open before him on the deck, his face as white,
under its tan, as a tallow candle.
For a while the ship kept bucking and sidling
like a vicious horse, the sails filling, now on one
tack, now on another, and the boom swinging
to and fro till the mast groaned aloud under the
strain. Now and again, too, there would come
a cloud of light sprays over the bulwark, and
a heavy blow of the ship's bows against the
swell: so much heavier weather was made of it
by this great rigged ship than by my home-
made lop-sided coracle, now gone to the bot-
tom of the sea.
At every jump of the schooner, red-cap
slipped to and fro; but-what was ghastly to
behold-neither his attitude nor his fixed teeth-
disclosing grin was anyway disturbed by this
rough usage. At every jump, too, Hands ap-
peared still more to sink into himself and settle
down upon the deck, his feet sliding ever the
farther out, and the whole body canting to-
oO
on
238 TREASURE ISLAND
wards the stern, so that his face became, little
by little, hid from me; and at last I could see
nothing beyond his ear and the frayed ringlet
of one whisker.
At the same time, I observed, around both of
them, splashes of dark blood upon the planks,
and began to feel sure that they had killed each
other in their drunken wrath.
While I was thus looking and wondering, in
a calm moment, when the ship was still, Israel
Hands turned partly round, and, with a low
moan, writhed himself back to the position in
which I had seen him first. The moan, which
told of pain and deadly weakness, and the way
in which his jaw hung open, went right to my
heart. But when I remembered the talk I had
overheard from the apple barrel, all pity left
me.
I walked aft until I reached the main-mast.
"Come aboard, Mr. Hands," I said ironi-
cally.
He rolled his eyes round heavily; but he was
too far gone to express surprise. All he could
do was to utter one word, "Brandy."
It occurred to me there was no time to lose;
and, dodging the boom as it once more lurched
across the deck, I slipped aft, and down the
companion stairs into the cabin.
It was such a scene of confusion as you can
hardly fancy. All the lockfast places had been
I STRIKE THE JOLLY ROGER 239
broken open in quest of the chart. The floor
was thick with mud, where ruffians had sat
down to drink or consult after wading in the
marshes round their camp. The bulkheads, all
painted in clear white, and beaded round with
gilt, bore a pattern of dirty hands. Dozens of
empty bottles clinked together in corners to the
rolling of the ship. One of the doctor's medical
books lay open on the table, half of the leaves
gutted out, I suppose, for pipelights. In the
midst of all this the lamp still cast a smoky
glow, obscure and brown as umber.
I went into the cellar; all the barrels were
gone, and of the bottles a most surprising
number had been drunk out and thrown
away. Certainly, since the mutiny began,
not a man of them could ever have been
sober. .
Foraging about, I found a bottle with some
brandy left, for Hands; and for myself I rout-
ed out some biscuit, some pickled fruits, a great
bunch of raisins, and a piece of cheese. With
these I came on deck, put down my own stock
behind the rudder head, and well out of the
coxswain's reach, went forward to the water-
breaker, and had a good, deep drink of water,
and then, and not till then, gave Hands the
brandy.
He must have drunk a gill before he took the
bottle from his mouth.
Or
tS 5
240 TREASURE ISLAND
"Ay," said he, "by thunder, but I wanted
some 0' that!"
I had sat down already in my own corner and
begun to eat.
"Much hurt?" I asked him.
He grunted, or, rather, I might say, he
barked.
"Tf that doctor was aboard," he said, "Id
be right enough in a couple of turns; but I
don't have no manner of luck, you see, and
that's what's the matter with me. As for that
swab, he's good and dead, he is," he added, in-
dicating the man with the red cap. "He warn't
no seaman, anyhow. And where mought you
have come from?"
"Well," said I, "I've come aboard to take
possession of this ship, Mr. Hands; and you'll
please regard me as your captain until further
notice."
20 He looked at me sourly enough, but said
nothing. Some of the colour had come back
into his cheeks, though he still looked very sick,
and still continued to slip out and settle down
as the ship banged about.
"By-the-by," I continued, "I can't have these
colours, Mr. Hands; and, 'by your leave, Dll
strike 'em. Better none than these."
And, again dodging the boom, I ran to the
colour lines, handed down their cursed black
30 flag, and chucked it overboard.
oO
1 Oo
L wn
I STRIKE THE JOLLY ROGER 241
"God save the king!" said I, waving my cap;
''and there's an end to Captain Silver!"
He watched me keenly and slyly, his chin all
the while on his breast.
"T reckon," he said at last-"I reckon, Cap'n
Hawkins, you'll kind of want to get ashore,
now. S'pose we talks."
"Why, yes," says I, 'with all my heart, Mr.
Hands. Say on.'"' And I went back to my meal
with a good appetite.
"This man," he began, nodding feebly at the
corpse-"O'Brien were his name-a rank Ire-
lander-this man and me got the canvas on
her, meaning for to sail her back. Well, he's
dead now, he is-as dead as bilge;° and who's
to sail this ship, I don't see. Without I gives you
a hint, you ain't that man, as far's I can tell.
Now, look here, you gives me food and drink,
and a old scarf or ankecher to tie my wound
up, you do; and I'll tell you how to sail her; and
that's about square all round, I take it."
"Tl tell you one thing," says I; "I'm not
going back to Captain Kidd's anchorage. I
mean to get into North Inlet, and beach her
quietly there."
"To be sure you did," he cried. "Why, I ain't
sich an infernal lubber, after all. I can see,
can't I? I've tried my fling, I have, and I've
lost, and it's you has the wind of me. North
Inlet? Why, I have no ch'ice, not I! I'd help
On
is]
242 TREASURE ISLAND
you sail her up to Execution Dock, by thunder!
so I would."
Well, as it seemed to me, there was some
sense in this. We struck our bargain on the
spot. In three minutes I had the Hispaniola
sailing easily before the wind along the coast
of Treasure Island, with good hopes of turning
the northern point ere noon, and beating down
again as far as North Inlet before high water,
10 when we might beach her safely, and wait till
the subsiding tide permitted us to land.
Then I lashed the tiller and went below to
my own chest, where I got a soft silk handker-
chief of my mother's. With this, and with my
15 aid, Hands bound up the great bleeding stab he
had received in the thigh, and after he had
eaten a little and had a swallow or two more of
the brandy, he began to pick up visibly, sat
straighter up, spoke louder and clearer, and
looked in every way another man.
The breeze served us admirably. We skimmed
before it like a bird, the coast of the island
flashing by, and the view changing every min-
ute. Soon we were past the high lands and bowl-
ing beside low, sandy country, sparsely dotted
with dwarf pines, and soon we were beyond
that again, and had turned the corner of the
rocky hill that ends the island on the north.
I was greatly elated with my new command,
30 and pleased with the bright, sunshiny weather
on
oO 2
I STRIKE THE JOLLY ROGER 243
and these different prospects of the coast. I had
now plenty of water and good things to eat, and
my conscience, which had smitten me hard for
my desertion, was quieted by the great con-
quest I had made. I should, I think, have had
nothing left me to desire but for the eyes of the
coxswain as they followed me derisively about
the deck, and the odd smile that appeared con-
tinually on his face. It was a smile that had in
it something both of pain and weakness-a
haggard, old man's smile; but there was, be-
sides that, a grain of derision, a shadow of
treachery, in his expression as he craftily
watched, and watched, and watched me at my
work.
CHAPTER XXVI
IsRAEL HANDS
THE wind, serving us to a desire, now hauled
into the west. We could run so much the easier
from the north-east corner of the island to the
mouth of the North Inlet. Only, as we had no
5 power to anchor, and dared not beach her till
the tide had flowed a good deal farther, time
hung on our hands. The coxswain told me how
to lay the ship to; after a good many trials I
succeeded, and we both sat in silence, over
19 another meal.
"Cap'n," said he, at length, with that same
uncomfortable smile, "here's my old shipmate,
O'Brien; s'pose you was to heave him over-
board. I ain't partic'lar as a rule, and I don't
15 take no blame for settling his hash; but I don't
reckon him ornamental, now, do you?"
"T'm not strong enough, and I don't like the
job; and there he lies, for me," said I.
"This here's an unlucky ship-this His-
99 paniola, Jim," he went on, blinking. "There's a
power of men been killed in this Hispaniola-a
sight o' poor seamen dead and gone since you
and me took ship to Bristol. I never seen sich
dirty luck, not I. There was this here O'Brien,
IsRAEL HANDS 245
now-he's dead, ain't he? Well, now, I'm no
scholar, and you're a lad as can read and
figure; and, to put it straight, do you take it as
a dead man is dead for good, or do he come
alive again?"
"You can kill the body, Mr. Hands, but not
the spirit; you must know that already," I
replied. 'O'Brien there is in another world, and
maybe watching us."
"Ah!" says he. "Well, that's unfort'nate-
appears as if killing parties was a waste of time.
Howsomever, sperrits don't reckon for much, by
what I've seen. [ll chance it with the sperrits,
Jim. And now, you've spoke up free, and I'll
take it kind if you'd step down into that there
cabin and get me a-well, a-shiver my tim-
bers! I can't hit the name on't; well, you get
me a bottle of wine, Jim,-this here brandy's
too strong for my head."
Now, the coxswain's hesitation seemed to be
unnatural; and as for the notion of his prefer-
ring wine to brandy, I entirely disbelieved it.
The whole story was a pretext. He wanted me
to leave the deck-so much was plain; but with
what purpose I could in no way imagine. His
eyes never met mine; they kept wandering to
and fro, up and down, now with a look to the
sky, now with a flitting glance upon the dead
O'Brien. All the time he kept smiling, and put-
ting his tongue out in the most guilty, embar-
oO
1 Oo
H mH
bo So
246 TREASURE ISLAND
rassed manner, so that a child could have told
that he was bent on some deception. I was
prompt with my answer, however, for I saw
where my advantage lay; and that with a fellow
so densely stupid I could easily conceal my
suspicions to the end.
"Some wine?" I said. "Far better. Will you
have white or red?"
"Well, I reckon it's about the blessed same
to me, shipmate," he replied; "so it's strong,
and plenty of it, what's the odds?"
"All right," I answered. "I'll bring you port,
Mr. Hands. But Ill have to dig for it."
With that I scuttled down the companion
with all the noise I could, slipped off my shoes,
ran quietly along the sparred gallery, mounted
the forecastle ladder, and popped my head out
of the fore companion. I knew he would not
expect to see me there; yet I took every precau-
tion possible; and certainly the worst of my
suspicions proved too true.
He had risen from his position to his hands
and knees; and, though his leg obviously hurt
him pretty sharply when he moved-for I could
hear him stifle a groan-yet it was at a good,
rattling rate that he trailed himself across the
deck. In half a minute he had reached the
port scuppers, and picked, out of a coil of rope,
a long knife, or rather a short dirk, discoloured
to the hilt with blood. He looked upon it for a
IsrAEL Hanps 247
moment, thrusting forth his under jaw, tried
the point upon his hand, and then, hastily con-
cealing it in the bosom of his jacket, trundled
back again into his old place against the bul-
wark.
This was all that I required to know. Israel
could move about; he was now armed; and if
he had been at so much trouble to get rid of
me, it was plain that I was meant to be the
victim. What he would do afterwards-whether
he would try to crawl right across the island
from North Inlet to the camp among the
swamps, or whether he would fire Long Tom,
trusting that his own comrades might come first
to help him, was, of course, more than I could
say.
Yet I felt sure that I could trust him in one
point, since in that our interests jumped to-
gether, and that was in the disposition of the
schooner. We both desired to have her stranded
safe enough, in a sheltered place, and so that,
when the time came, she could be got off again
with as little labour and danger as might be;
and until that was done I considered that my
life would certainly be spared.
While I was thus turning the business over
in my mind, I had not been idle with my body.
I had stolen back to the cabin, slipped once
more into my shoes, and laid my hand at ran-
dom on a bottle of wine, and now, with this
bo or
Or
f=)
ow
o
oO
248 TREASURE ISLAND
for an excuse, I made my re-appearance on the
deck.
Hands lay as I had left him, all fallen to-
gethcr in a bundle, and with his eyelids lowered,
as though he were too weak to bear the light.
He looked up, however, at my coming, knocked
the neck off the bottle, like a man who had done
the same thing often, and took a good swig,
with his favourite toast of '""Here's luck!" Then
he lay quiet for a little, and then, pulling out a
stick of tobacco, begged me to cut him a quid.
"Cut me a junk o' that," says he, "for I
haven't no knife, and hardly strength enough,
so be as I had. Ah, Jim, Jim, I reckon I've
missed stays°! Cut me a quid, as'll likely be
the last, lad; for I'm for my long home, and
no mistake."
"Well," said I, "T'll cut you some tobacco;
but if I was you and thought myself so badly,
I would go to my prayers, like a Christian
man."
"Why?" said he. "Now, you tell me why."
"Why?" I cried. "You were asking me just
now about the dead. You've broken your trust;
you've lived in sin and lies and blood; there's a
man you killed lying at your feet this moment;
and you ask me why! For God's mercy, Mr.
Hands, that's why."
I spoke with a little heat, thinking of the
30 bloody dirk he had hidden in his pocket, and
IsRAEL HANDS 249
designed, in his ill thoughts, to end me with.
He, for his part, took a great draught of the
wine, and spoke with the most unusual solem-
nity.
"For thirty years," he said, "I've sailed the
seas, and seen good and bad, better and worse,
fair weather and foul, provisions running out,
knives going, and what not. Well, now I tell
you, I never seen good come 0' goodness yet.
Him as strikes first is my fancy; dead men
don't bite; them's my views-amen, so be it.
And now, you look here,' he added, suddenly
changing his tone, '"'we've had about enough of
this foolery. The tide's made good enough by
now. You just take my orders, Cap'n Hawkins,
and we'll sail slap in and be done with it."
All told, we had scarce two miles to run; but
the navigation was delicate, the entrance to this
northern anchorage was not only narrow and
shoal, but lay east and west, so that the
schooner must be nicely handled to be got in. I
think I was a good, prompt subaltern,° and I
am very sure that Hands was an excellent pilot;
for we went about and about, and dodged in,
shaving the banks, with a certainty and a neat-
ness that were a pleasure to behold.
Scarcely had we passed the heads before the
land closed around us. The shores of North
Inlet were as thickly wooded as those of the
southern anchorage; but the space was longer
al
oO
1 oO
is) Or
250 'TREASURE ISLAND
and narrower, and more like, what in truth it
was, the estuary® of a river. Right before us, at
the southern end, we saw the wreck of a ship
in the last stages of dilapidation. It had been a
great vessel of three masts, but had lain so long
exposed to the injuries of the weather, that it
was hung about with great webs of dripping
sea-weed, and on the deck of it shore bushes
had taken root, and now flourished thick with
flowers. It was a sad sight, but it showed us
that the anchorage was calm.
"Now," said Hands, "look there; there's a pet
bit for to beach a ship in. Fine flat sand, never
a catspaw,° trees all around of it, and flowers
a-blowing like a garding on that old ship."
"And once beached," I inquired, "how shall
we get her off again?"
"Why, so,' he replied: 'you take a line
ashore there on the other side at low water:
take a turn about one o' them big pines; bring
it back, take a turn round the capstan, and lie-
to for the tide. Come high water, all hands take
a pull upon the line, and off she comes as sweet
as natur'. And now, boy, you stand by. We're
near the bit now, and she's too much way on
her. Starboard a little-so-steady-starboard
-larboard a little-steady-steady!"'
So he issued his commands, which I breath-
lessly obeyed; till, all of a sudden, he cried,
"Now, my hearty, luff!" And I put the helm
il 'i ita IN
H os '8 are <8 -
WARWICK GOOLE
Jim anp Israr~t HAnps
IsRAEL HANDS 253
hard up, and the Hispaniola swung round
rapidly, and ran stem on for the low wooded
shore.
The excitement of these last manceuvres had
somewhat interfered with the watch I had kept
hitherto, sharply enough, upon the coxswain.
Even then I was still so much interested, wait-
ing for the ship to touch, that I had quite forgot
the peril that hung over my head, and stood
craning over the starboard bulwarks and watch-
ing the ripples spreading wide before the bows.
I might have fallen without a struggle for my
life, had not a sudden disquietude seized upon
me, and made me turn my head. Perhaps I had
heard a creak, or seen his shadow moving with
the tail of my eye; perhaps it was an instinct
like a cat's; but, sure enough, when I looked
round, there was Hands, already half-way to-
wards me, with the dirk in his right hand.
We must both have cried out aloud when our
eyes met; but while mine was the shrill cry of
terror, his was a roar of fury like a charging
bull's. At the same instant he threw himself
forward, and I leaped sideways towards the
bows. As I did so, I let go of the tiller, which
sprang sharp to leeward; and I think this saved
my life, for it struck Hands across the chest,
and stopped him, for the moment, dead.
Before he could recover, I was safe out of
the corner where he had me trapped, with all :
uo
OV
a o
et oO
254 TREASURE ISLAND
the deck to dodge about. Just forward of the
main-mast, I stopped, drew a pistol from my
pocket, took a cool aim, though he had already
turned and was once more coming directly after
me, and drew the trigger. The hammer fell, but
there followed neither flash nor sound; the
priming was useless with sea water. I cursed
myself for my neglect. Why had not I, long
before, reprimed and reloaded my only weap-
ons? Then I should not have been, as now, a
mere fleeing sheep before this butcher,
Wounded as he was, it was wonderful how
fast he could move, his grizzled hair tumbling
over his face, and his face itself as red as a red
ensign with his haste and fury. I had no time to
try my other pistol, nor, indeed, much inclina-
tion, for I was sure it would be useless. One
thing I saw plainly: I must not simply retreat
before him, or he would speedily hold me boxed
into the bows, as a moment since he had so
nearly boxed me in the stern. Once so caught,
and nine or ten inches of the blood-stained dirk
would be my last experience on this side of
eternity. I placed my palms against the main-
mast, which was of a goodish bigness, and
waited, every nerve upon the stretch.
Seeing that I meant to dodge, he also paused;
and a moment or two passed in feints on his
part, and corresponding movements upon mine.
It was such a game as I had often played at
IsRAEL HANDS 255
home about the rocks of Black Hill Cove; but
never before, you may be sure, with such a
wildly beating heart as now. Still, as I say, it
was a boy's game, and I thought I could hold
my own at it, against an elderly seaman with
a wounded thigh. Indeed, my courage had be-
gun to rise so high, that I allowed myself a few
darting thoughts on what would be the end of
the affair; and while I saw certainly that I
could spin it out for long, I saw no hope of any
ultimate escape.
Well, while things stood thus, suddenly the
Hispaniola struck, staggered, ground for an in-
stant in the sand, and then, swift as a blow,
canted over to the port side, till the deck stood
at an angle of forty-five degrees, and about a
puncheon of water splashed into the scupper
holes, and lay, in a pool, between the deck and
bulwark.
We were both of us capsized in a second, and
both of us rolled, almost together, into the
scuppers; the dead red-cap, with his arms still
spread out, tumbling stiffly after us. So near
were we, indeed, that my head came against the
coxswain's foot with a crack that made my
teeth rattle. Blow and all, I was the first afoot
again; for Hands had got involved with the
dead body. The sudden canting of the ship had
made the deck no place for running on; I had
to find some new way of escape, and that upon :
Oo
oo Oo
Or
256%, TREASURE ISLAND
the instant, for my foe was almost touching me.
Quick as thought, I sprang into the mizzen
shrouds, rattled up hand over hand, and did
not draw a breath till I was seated on the
cross-trees. !
I had been saved by being prompt; the dirk
had struck not half a foot below me, as I pur-
sued my upward flight; and there stood Israel
Hands with his mouth open and his face up-
turned to mine, a perfect statue of surprise and
disappointment.
Now that I had a moment to myself, I lost
no time in changing the priming of my pistol,
and then, having one ready for service, and to
make assurance doubly sure, I proceeded to
draw the load of the other, and recharge it
afresh from the beginning.
My new employment struck Hands all of a
heap; he began to see the dice going against
him; and after an obvious hesitation, he also
hauled himself heavily into the shrouds, and,
with the dirk in his teeth, began slowly and
painfully to mount. It cost him no end of time
and groans to haul his wounded leg behind him;
and I had quietly finished my arrangements
before he was much more than a third of the
way up. Then, with a pistol in either hand, I
addressed him.
"One more step, Mr. Hands," said I,
"and Vl blow your brains out! Dead men
IsRAEL Hanps 257
don't bite, you know," I added with a chuckle.
He stopped instantly. I could see by the
working of his face that he was trying to think,
and the process was so slow and laborious that,
in my new-found security, I laughed aloud. At
last, with a swallow or two, he spoke, his face
still wearing the same expression of extreme
perplexity. In order to speak he had to take the
dagger from his mouth, but, in all else, he re-
mained unmoved.
"Jim," says he, "I reckon we're fouled, you
and me, and we'll have to sign articles. I'd have
had you but for that there lurch: but I don't
have no luck, not I; and I reckon I'll have to
strike, which comes hard, you see, for a master
mariner to a ship's younker like you, Jim."
I was drinking in his words and smiling
away, as conceited as a cock upon a wall, when,
all in a breath, back went his right hand over
his shoulder. Something sang like an arrow :
through the air: I felt a blow and then a sharp
pang, and there I was pinned by the shoulder
to the mast. In the horrid pain and surprise of
the moment-I scarce can say it was by my
own volition, and I am sure it was without a :
conscious aim-both my pistols went off, and
both escaped out of my hands. They did not
fall alone; with a choked cry, the coxswain
loosed his grasp upon the shrouds, and plunged
head first into the water.
or
r
oO
or
Oo
CHAPTER XXVII
"Preces OF EIGHT"
Ow1nc to the cant of the vessel, the masts
hung far out over the water, and from my perch
on the cross-trees I had nothing below me but
the surface of the bay. Hands, who was not so
far up, was, in consequence, nearer to the ship,
and fell between me and the bulwarks. He
rose once to the surface in a lather of foam and
blood, and then sank again for good. As the
water settled, I could see him lying huddled
together on the clean, bright sand in the shadow
of the vessel's sides. A fish or two whipped past
his body. Sometimes, by the quivering of the
water, he appeared to move a little, as if he
were trying to rise. But he was dead enough, for
all that, being both shot and drowned, and was
food for fish in the very place where he had
designed my slaughter.
I was no sooner certain of this than I began
to feel sick, faint, and terrified. The hot blood
was running over my back and chest. The dirk,
where it had pinned my shoulder to the mast,
seemed to burn like a hot iron; yet it was not
so much these real sufferings that distressed me,
"PIECES OF EIGHT" 259
for these, it seemed to me, I could bear without
a murmur; it was the horror I had upon my
mind of falling from the cross-trecs into that
still green water beside the body of the cox-
swain.
I clung with both hand till my nails ached,
and I shut my eyes as if to cover up the peril.
Gradually my mind came back again, my
pulses quieted down to a more natural time,
and I was once more in possession of myself.
It was my first thought to pluck forth the
dirk; but either it stuck too hard or my nerve
failed me; and I desisted with a violent shud-
der. Oddly enough, that very shudder did the
business. The knife, in fact, had come the
nearest in the world to missing me altogether;
it held me by a mere pinch of skin, and this the
shudder tore away. The blood ran down the
faster, to be sure; but I was my own master
again, and only tacked to the mast by my coat
and shirt.
These last I broke through with a sudden
jerk, and then regained the deck by the star-
board shrouds. For nothing in the world would
I have again ventured, shaken as I was, upon
the overhanging port shrouds, from which
Israel had so lately fallen.
I went below, and did what I could for my
wound; it pained me a good deal, and still bled
freely; but it was neither deep nor dangerous,
be oO
bo o
iM) 0
or
- o
260 TREASURE ISLAND
nor did it greatly gall me when I used my arm.
Then I looked around me, and as the ship was
now, in a sense, my own, I began to think of
clearing it from its last passenger-the dead
man, O'Brien.
He had pitched, as I have said, against the
bulwarks, where he lay like some horrible, un-
gainly sort of puppet; life-size, indeed, but
how different from life's colour or life's comeli-
ness! In that position, I could easily have my
way with him; and as the habit of tragical ad-
ventures had worn off almost all my terror for
the dead, I took him by the waist as if he had
been a sack of bran, and, with one good heave,
tumbled him overboard. He went in with a
sounding plunge; the red cap came off, and
remained. floating on the surface; and as soon
as the splash subsided, I could see him and
Israel lying side by side, both wavering with
the tremulous movement of the water. O'Brien,
though still quite a young man, was very bald.
There he lay, with that bald head across the
knees of the man who had killed him, and the
quick fishes steering to and fro over both.
I was now alone upon the ship; the tide had
just turned. The sun was within so few degrees
of setting that already the shadow of the pines
upon the western shore began to reach right
across the anchorage, and fall in patterns on the
deck. The evening breeze had sprung up, and
"Preces OF EIGHT" 261
though it was well warded off by the hill with
the two peaks upon the east, the cordage had
begun to sing a little softly to itself and the idle
sails to rattle to and fro.
I began to see a danger to the ship. The jibs
I speedily doused® and brought tumbling to the
deck; but the mainsail was a harder matter.
Of course, when the schooner canted over, the
boom had swung out-board, and the cap of it
and a foot or two of sail hung even under water.
I thought this made it still more dangerous;
yet the strain was so heavy that I half feared
to meddle. At last, I got my knife and cut the
halyards. The peak dropped instantly, a great
belly of loose canvas floated broad upon the
water; and since, pull as I liked, I could not
budge the downhaul, that was the extent of
what I could accomplish. For the rest, the
Hispaniola must trust to luck, like myself.
By this time the whole anchorage had fallen
into shadow-the last rays, I remember, falling
through a glade of the wood, and shining bright
as jewels, on the flowery mantle of the wreck.
It began to be chill; the tide was rapidly fleet-
ing seaward, the schooner settling more and
more on her beam-ends.
I scrambled forward and looked over. It
seemed shallow enough, and holding the cut
hawser in both hands for a last security, I let
myself drop softly overboard. The water ;
on
oO
262 TREASURE ISLAND
scarcely reached my waist; the sand was firm
and covered with ripple marks, and I waded
ashore in great spirits, leaving the Hispaniola
on her side, with her main-sail trailing wide
upon the surface of the bay. About the same
time the sun went fairly down, and the breeze
whistled low in the dusk among the tossing
pines.
At least, and at last, I was off the sea, nor
» had I returned thence empty-handed. There lay
the schooner, clear at last from buccaneers and
ready for our own men to board and get to'sea
again. I had nothing nearer my fancy than to
get home to the stockade and boast of my
achievements. Possibly I might be blamed a bit
for my truantry, but the recapture of the His-
paniola was a clenching answer, and I hoped
that even Captain Smollett would confess I had
not lost my time.
So thinking, and in famous spirits, I began to .
set my face homeward for the block-house and
my companions. I remembered that the most
easterly of the. rivers which drain into Captain
Kidd's anchorage ran from the two-peaked hill
upon my left; and I bent my course in that
direction that I might pass the stream while it
was small. The wood was pretty open, and
keeping along the lower spurs, I had soon
turned the corner of that hill, and not long
"PIECES OF EIGHT" 263
after waded to the mid-calf across the water-
course.
This brought me near to where I had en-
countered Ben Gunn, the maroon; and I walked
more circumspectly, keeping an eye on every
side. The dusk had come nigh hand completely,
and, as I opened out the cleft between the two
peaks, I became aware of a wavering glow
against the sky, where, as I judged, the man of
the island was cooking his supper before a roar-
ing fire. And yet I wondered, in my heart, that
he should show himself so careless. For if I
could see this radiance, might it not reach the
eyes of Silver himself where he camped upon
the shore among the marshes?
Gradually the night fell blacker; it was all I
could do to guide myself even roughly towards
my destination; the double hill behind me and
the Spyglass on my right hand loomed faint and
fainter; the stars were few and pale; and in the
low ground where I wandered I kept tripping
among bushes and rolling into sandy pits.
Suddenly a kind of brightness fell about me.
I looked up; a pale glimmer of moonbeams had
alighted on the summit of the Spyglass, and
soon after I saw something broad and silvery
moving low down behind the trees, and knew
the moon had risen.
With this to help me, I passed rapidly over
on
N
no
oO
264 TREASURE ISLAND
what remained to me of my journey; and, some-
times walking, sometimes running, impatiently
drew near to the stockade. Yet, as I began to
thread the grove that lies before it, I was not
so thoughtless but that I slacked my pace and
went a trifle warily. It would have been a poor
end of my adventures to get shot down by my
own party in mistake.
The moon was climbing higher and higher;
its light began to fall here and there in masses
through the more open districts of the wood;
and right in front of me a glow of a different
colour appeared among the trees. It was red
and hot, and now and again it was a little
darkened-as it were the embers of a bonfire
smouldering.
For the life of me, I could not think what it
might be.
At last I came right down upon the borders
of the clearing. The western end was already
steeped in moonshine; the rest, and the block-
house itself, still lay in a black shadow,
chequered with long, silvery streaks of light.
On the other side of the house an immense fire
had burned itself into clear embers and shed a
steady, red reverberation, contrasted strongly
with the mellow paleness of the moon. There
was not a soul stirring, nor a sound beside the
noises of the breeze.
I stopped, with much wonder in my heart,
"PIECES OF EIGHT" 265
and perhaps a little terror also. It had not been
our way to build great fires; we were, indeed,
by the captain's orders, somewhat niggardly of
firewood; and I began to fear that something
had gone wrong while I was absent.
I stole round by the eastern end, keeping
close in shadow, and at a convenient place,
where the darkness was thickest, crossed the
palisade.
To make assurance surer, I got upon my
hands and knees, and crawled, without a sound,
towards the corner of the house. As I drew
nearer, my heart was suddenly and greatly
lightened. It is not a pleasant noise in itself,
and I have often complained of it at other
times; but just then it was like music to hear
my friends snoring together so loud and peace-
ful in their sleep. The sea cry of the watch, that
beautiful '"All's well," never fell more reassur-
ingly on my ear.
In the meantime, there was no doubt of one
thing; they kept an infamous bad watch. If it
had been Silver and his lads that were now
creeping in on them, not a soul would have seen
daybreak. That was what it was, thought I, to
have the captain wounded; and again I blamed
myself sharply for leaving them in that danger
with so few to mount guard.
By this time I had got to the door and stood
up. All was dark within, so that I could dis-
oO
f=)
ol
266 TREASURE ISLAND
tinguish nothing by the eye: As for sounds,
there was the steady drone of the snorers, and
a small occasional noise, a flickering or pecking
that I could in no way account for.
With my arms before me I walked steadily
in. I should lie down in my own place (I
thought, with a silent chuckle) and enjoy their
faces when they found me in the morning.
My foot struck something yielding-it was a
sleeper's leg; and he turned and groaned, but
without awakening.
And then, all of sudden, a shrill voice broke
forth out of the darkness:
"Pieces of eight! pieces of eight! pieces of
eight! pieces of eight! pieces of eight!" and so .
forth, without pause or change, like the clack-
ing of a tiny mill.
Silver's green parrot, Captain Flint! It was
she whom I had heard pecking at a piece of
bark; it was she, keeping better watch than any
human being, who thus announced my arrival
with her wearisome refrain.
I had no time left me to recover. At the
sharp, clipping tone of the parrot, the sleepers
awoke and sprang up; and with a mighty oath,
the voice of Silver cried: -
"Who goes?"
I turned to run, struck violently against one
person, recoiled, and ran full into the arms of a
"PIECES OF EIGHT" 267
second, who, for his part, closed upon and held
me tight.
"Bring a torch, Dick," said Silver, when my
capture was thus assured.
And one of the men left the log-house and
presently returned with a lighted brand.
PART VI
ae CAPTAIN SILVER
GHAP TE Rae xen VELL
IN THE ENEmMy's Camp
THE red glare of the torch, lighting up the
interior of the block-house, showed me the
worst of my apprehensions realised. The pirates
were in possession of the house and stores:
there was the cask of cognac, there were the
pork and bread, as before; and, what tenfold
increased my horror, not a sign of any prisoner.
I could only judge that all had perished, and
my heart smote me sorely that I had not been
there to perish with them.
There were six of the buccaneers, all told;
not another man was left alive. Five of them
were on their feet, flushed and swollen, sud-
denly called out of the first sleep of drunken-
ness. The sixth had only risen upon his elbow;
he was deadly pale, and the blood-stained ban-
dage round his head told that he had recently
been wounded, and still more recently dressed. I
remembered the man who had been shot and
had run back among the woods in the great
attack, and doubted not that this was he.
The parrot sat, preening her plumage, on
Long John's shoulder. He himself, I thought,
oOo
al
oO
o
oO
272 TREASURE ISLAND
looked somewhat paler and more stern than I
was used to. He still wore the fine broadcloth
suit in which he had fulfilled his mission, but it
was bitterly the worse for wear, daubed with
clay and torn with the sharp briers of the wood.
"So," said he, "here's Jim Hawkins, shiver
my timbers! dropped in, like, eh? Well, come, I
take that friendly."
And thereupon he sat down across the brandy
cask and began to fill'a pipe.
"Give me a loan of the link,° Dick," said he;
and then, when he had a good light, "'that'll do,
lad," he added; '"'stick the glim in the wood
heap; and you, gentlemen, bring yourselves
to!-you needn't stand up for Mr. Hawkins;
he'll excuse you, you may lay to that. And so,
Jim"-stopping the tobacco-'here you were,
and quite a pleasant surprise for poor old John.
I see you were smart when first I set my eyes
on you; but this here gets away from me clean,
it do."
To all this, as may be well supposed, I made
no answer. They had set me with my back
against the wall; and I stood there, looking
Silver in the face, pluckily enough, I hope, to
all outward appearance, but with black despair
in my heart.
Silver took a whiff or two of his pipe with
great composure, and then ran on again.
IN THE ENEMyY's CAMP 273
"Now, you see, Jim, so be as you are here,"
says he, "I'll give you a piece of my mind. I've
always liked you, I have, for a lad of spirit, and
the picter of my own self when I was young
and handsome. I always wanted you to jine and
take your share, and die a gentleman, and now,
my cock, you've got to. Cap'n Smollett's a fine
seaman, as Ill own up to any day, but stiff on
discipline. 'Dooty is dooty,' says he, and right
he is. Just you keep clear of the cap'n. The
doctor himself is gone dead again you-'un-
grateful scamp' was what he said; and the
short and the long of the whole story is about
here: you can't go back to your own lot, for
they won't have you; and, without you start a
third ship's company all by yourself, which
might be lonely, you'll have to jine with Cap'n
Silver.'
So far so good. My friends, then, were still
alive, and though I partly believed the truth
of Silver's statement, that the cabin party were
incensed at me for my desertion, I was more
relieved than distressed by what I heard.
"T don't say nothing as to your being in our
hands," continued Silver, "though there you
are, and you may lay to it. I'm all for argy-
ment; I never seen good come out o' threaten-
ing. If you like the service, well, you'll jine;
and if you don't, Jim, why, you're free to an-
on
H or
1) nr
274 TREASURE ISLAND
swer no-free and welcome, shipmate; and if
fairer can be said by mortal seaman, shiver my
sides!"
"Am I to answer, then?" I asked, with a
very tremulous voice. Through all this sneering
talk, I was made to feel the threat of death
that overhung me, and my cheeks burned and
my heart beat painfully in my breast.
"Tad," said Silver, '"'no one's a-pressing of
10 you. Take your bearings. None of us won't
hurry you, mate; time goes so pleasant in your
company, you see."
"Well," says I, growing a bit bolder, "if I'm
to choose, I declare I have a right to know
15 what's what, and why you're here, and where
my friends are."
"Wot's wot?" repeated one of the buccaneers,
in a deep growl. "Ah, he'd be a lucky one as
knowed that!"
"Yow ll, perhaps, batten down your hatches
till you're spoke to, my friend," cried Silver
truculently° to this speaker. And then, in his
first gracious tones, he replied to me: "'Yester-
day morning, Mr. Hawkins," said he, "in the
dog-watch,° down came Dr. Livesey with a flag
of truce. Says he, 'Cap'n Silver, you're sold
out. Ship's gone.' Well, maybe we'd been taking
a glass, and a song to help it round. I won't say
no. Leastways, none of us had looked out. We
30 looked out, and by thunder! the old ship was
or
bo Oo
2 ol
IN THE ENEMY's CAMP 245
gone. I never seen a pack o' fools look fishier;
and you may lay to that, if I tells you that
looked the fishiest. 'Well,' says the doctor, 'let's
bargain.' We bargained, him and I, and here
we are: stores, brandy, block-house, the fire-
wood you was thoughtful enough to cut, and,
in a manner of speaking the whole blessed boat,
from cross-trees to keelson.° As for them,
they've tramped; I don't know where's they
are."
He drew again quietly at his pipe.
"And lest you should take it into that head
of yours," he went on, "that you was included
in the treaty, here's the last word that was
said: 'How many are you,' says I, 'to leave?'
'Four,' says he-'four, and one of us wounded.
As for that boy, I don't know where he is, con-
found him,' says he, 'nor I don't much care.
We're about sick of him.' These was his words."
"Ts that all?" I asked.
"Well, it's all that you're to hear, my son,"
returned Silver.
"And now I am to choose?"'
"And now you are to choose, and you may
lay to that," said Silver.
"Well," said I, "I'm not such a fool but I
know pretty well what I have to look for. Let
the worst come to the worst, it's little I care.
I've seen too many die since | fell in with you.
But there's a thing or two I have to tell you,"
On
Or
1 ot
2 Oo
276 TREASURE ISLAND
I said, and by this time I was quite excited;
"and the first is this: here you are, in a bad
way: ship lost, treasure lost, men lost; your
whole business gone to wreck; and if you want
to know who did it-it was I! I was in the
apple barrel the night we sighted land, and I
heard you, John, and you, Dick Johnson, and
Hands, who is now at the bottom of the sea,
and told every word you said before the hour
was out. And as for the schooner, it was I who
cut her cable, and it was I that killed the men
you had aboard of her, and it was I who
brought her where you'll never see her more,
not one of you. The laugh's on my side; I've
had the top of this business from the first; I
no more fear you than I fear a fly. Kill me, if
you please, or spare me. But one thing I'll say,
and no more; if you spare me, bygones are
bygones, and when you fellows are in court for
piracy, I'll save you all I can. It is for you to
choose. Kill another and do yourselves no good,
or spare me and keep a witness to save you
from the gallows."
I stopped, for, I tell you, I was out of breath,
and, to my wonder, not a man of them moved,
but all sat staring at me like as many sheep.
And while they were still staring, I broke out
again :-
"And now, Mr. Silver," I said, "I believe
30 you're the best man here, and if things go to
IN THE ENEMyY's Camp 277
the worst, Ill take it kind of you to let the
doctor know the way I took it."
"Pll bear it in mind," said Silver, with an
accent so curious that I could not, for the life
of me, decide whether he were laughing at my
request, or had been favourably affected by
my courage.
"T'l] put one to that," cried the old mahogany-
faced seaman-Morgan by name-whom I had
seen in Long John's public-house upon the
quays of Bristol. "It was him that knowed
Black Dog."
"Well, and see here," added the sea-cook.
"T'll put another again to that, by thunder! for
it was this same boy that faked the chart from
Billy Bones. First and last, we've split upon
Jim Hawkins!"
"Then here goes!" said Morgan, with an
oath.
And he sprang up, drawing his knife as if he
had been twenty.
"Avast, there!" cried Silver. '""Who are you,
Tom Morgan? Maybe you thought you was
cap'n here, perhaps. By the powers, but I'll
teach you better! Cross me, and you'll go where
many a good man's gone before you, first and
last, these thirty year back-some to the yard-
arm,° shiver my timbers! and some by the
board, and all to feed the fishes. There's never
a man looked me between the eyes and seen a
o
278 TREASURE ISLAND
good day a'terwards, Tom Morgan, you may
lay to that."
Morgan paused; but a hoarse murmur rose
from the others.
"Tom's right," said one.
"T stood hazing long enough from one,"
added another. "I'll be hanged if Dll be hazed
by you, John Silver."
"Did any of you gentlemen want to have it
out with me?" roared Silver, bending far for-
ward from his position on the keg, with his pipe
still glowing in his right hand. "'Put a name on
what you're at; you ain't dumb, I reckon. Him
that wants shall get it. Have I lived this many
years, and a son of a rum puncheon cock his
hat athwart my hawse at the latter end of it?
You know the way; you're all gentlemen 0'
fortune, by your account. Well, I'm ready. Take
a cutlass, him that dares, and I'll see the colour
of his inside, crutch and all, before that pipe's
empty."
Not a man stirred; not a man answered.
"That's your sort, is it?" he added, returning
his pipe to his mouth. "Well, you're a gay lot
to look at, anyway. Not much worth to fight,
you ain't. P'r'aps you can understand King
George's English. I'm cap'n here by 'lection.
I'm cap'n here because I'm the best man by a
long sea-mile. You won't fight, as gentlemen 0' »
fortune should; then, by thunder, you'll obey,
In THE ENEMyY's CAMP 279
and you may lay to it! I like that boy, now;
I never seen a better boy than that. He's more
a man than any pair of cats of you in this
here house, and what I say is this: let me see
him that'll lay a hand on him-that's what I
say, and you may lay to it."
There was a long pause after this. I stood
straight up against the wall, my heart still
going like a sledge-hammer, but with a ray of
hope now shining in my bosom. Silver leant
back against the wall, his arms crossed, his pipe
in the corner of his mouth, as calm as though
he had been in church; yet his eye kept wan-
dering furtively, and he kept the tail of it on
his unruly followers. They, on their part, drew
gradually .together towards the far end of the
block-house, and the low hiss of their whisper-
ing sounded in my ear continuously, like a
stream. One after another, they would look up,
and the red light of the torch would fall for a
second on their nervous faces; but it was not
towards me, it was towards Silver that they
turned their eyes.
"You seem to have a lot to say," remarked
Silver, spitting far into the air. 'Pipe up and
let me hear it, or lay to."
"Ax your pardon, sir," returned one of the
men, ''you're pretty free with some of the rules;
maybe you'll kindly keep an eye upon the rest.
This crew's dissatisfied; this crew don't vally°
ol
280 | TREASURE ISLAND
bullying a marlinspike;° this crew has its
rights like other crews, T'll make so free as
that; and by your own rules, I take it we can
talk together. I ax your pardon, sir, acknowl-
5edging you to be capting at this present; but
I claim my right, and steps outside for a
council."
And with an elaborate sea-salute, this fellow,
a long, ill-looking, yellow-eyed man of five and
10thirty, stepped coolly towards the door and
disappeared out of the house. One after an-
other, the rest followed his example; each
making a salute as he passed; each adding
some apology. "According to rules," said one.
15"'Fo'c's'le council," said Morgan. And so with
one remark or another, all marched out, and
left Silver and me alone with the torch.
The sea-cook instantly removed his pipe.
"Now, look you here, Jim Hawkins," he said,
20in a steady whisper, that was no more than
audible, "you're within half a plank of death,
and, what's a long sight worse, of torture.
They're going to throw me off. But, you mark,
I stand by you through thick and thin. I didn't
25 mean to; no, not till you spoke up. I was about
desperate to lose that much blunt,° and be
hanged into the bargain. But I see you was the
right sort. I says to myself: You stand by
Hawkins, John, and Hawkins'll stand by you.
30 Youre his last card, and, by the living thunder,
IN THE ENEMyY's Camp 281
John, he's yours! Back to back, says I. You
save your witness, and he'll save your neck!"'
I began dimly to understand.
"You mean all's lost?" I asked.
"Ay, by gum, I do!" he answered. "Ship
gone, neck gone-that's the size of it. Once I
looked into that bay, Jim Hawkins, and seen no
schooner-well, I'm tough, but I gave out. As
for that lot and their council, mark me, they're
outright fools and cowards. I'll save your life
-if so be as I can-from them. But, see here,
Jim-tit for tat-you save Long John from
swinging."
I was bewildered; it seemed a thing so hope-
less he was asking-he, the old buccaneer, the
ringleader throughout.
"What I can do, that I'll do," I said.
"Tt's a bargain!" cried Long John. "You
speak up plucky, and, by thunder! Ive a
chance."
He hobbled to the torch, where it stood
propped among the firewood, and took a fresh
light to his pipe.
"Understand me, Jim," he said, returning.
I've a head on my shoulders, I have. I'm on
cyuire's side now. I know you've got that ship
safe somewheres. How you done it, I don't
know, but safe it is. I guess Hands and O'Brien
turned soft. I never much believed in neither of
them. Now you mark me. I ask no questions, '
oO
le
Oo al
282 TREASURE ISLAND
nor I won't let others. I know when a game's
up, I do; and I know a lad that's staunch. Ah,
you that's young-you and me might have done
a power of good together!"'
He drew some cognac from the cask into a
tin cannikin.
"Will you taste, messmate?" he asked; and
when I had refused: "Well, Vil take a drain
myself, Jim," said he. "I need a caulker, for
there's trouble on hand. And, talking o' trouble,
why did that doctor give me the chart, Jim?"
My face expressed a wonder so unaffected
that he saw the needlessness of further ques-
tions.
"Ah, well, he did, though," said he. "And
there's something under that, no doubt-some-
thing, surely, under that, Jim-bad or good."
And he took another swallow of the brandy,
shaking his great fair head like a man who
looks forward to the worst.
CHAPTER XXIX
THE Biack Spor AGAIN
THE council of the buccaneers had lasted
some time, when one of them re-entered the
house, and with a repetition of the same salute,
which had in my eyes an ironical air, begged
for a moment's loan of the torch. Silver briefly
agreed; and this emissary retired again, leaving
us together in the dark.
"There's a breeze coming, Jim," said Silver,
who had, by this time, adopted quite a friendly
and familiar tone.
I turned to the loophole nearest me and
looked out. The embers of the great fire had so
far burned themselves out, and now glowed so
low and duskily, that I understood why these
conspirators desired a torch. About half way
down the slope to the stockade, they were col-
lected in a group; one held the light; another
was on his knees in their midst, and I saw the
blade of an open knife shine in his hand with
varying colours, in the moon and torchlight.
The rest were all somewhat stooping, as though
watching the manceuvres of this last. I could
just make out that he had a book as well as a
oad
i
bo 0
ot
2 Or
284 TREASURE ISLAND
knife in his hand; and was still wondering how
anything so incongruous had come in their
possession, when the kneeling figure rose once
more to his feet, and the whole party began to
move together towards the house.
"Here they come," said I; and I returned to
my former position, for it seemed beneath my
dignity that they should find me watching
them.
"Well, let 'em come, lad-let 'em come,"
said Silver, cheerily. "I've still a shot in my
locker."
The door opened, and the five men, standing
huddled together just inside, pushed one of
their number forward. In any other circum-
stances it would have been comical to see his
slow advance, hesitating as he set down each
foot, but holding his closed right hand in front
of him.
"Step up, lad," cried Silver. "I won't eat you.
Hand it over, lubber. I know the rules, I do; I
won't hurt a depytation."
Thus encouraged, the buccaneer stepped
forth more briskly, and having passed some-
thing to Silver, from hand to hand, slipped yet
more smartly back again to his companions.
The sea-cook looked at what had been given
him.
"The black spot! I thought so," he observed.
"Where might you have got the paper? Why,
is wane GOS:
Tue Biack Spot AGAIN
THE Biack Spot AGAIN 287
hillo! look here, now: this ain't lucky! You've
gone and cut this out of a Bible. What fool's
cut a Bible?"
"Ah, there!" said Morgan-"'there! Wot did
I say? No good'll come o' that, I said."
"Well, you've about fixed it now, among
you," continued Silver. 'You'll all swing now,
i reckon. What soft-headed lubber had a
Bible?"'
"Tt was Dick," said one.
"Dick, was it? Then Dick can get to
prayers," said Silver. "He's seen his slice of
luck, has Dick, and you may lay to that."
But here the long man with the yellow eyes
struck in.
"Belay that talk, John Silver," he said. '"This
crew has tipped you the black spot in full
council, as in dooty bound: just you turn it
over, as in dooty bound, and see what's wrote
there. Then you can talk."
"Thanky, George," replied the sea-cook.
"You always was brisk for business, and has
the rules by heart, George, as I'm pleased to
see. Well, what is it, anyway? Ah! 'Deposed'-
that's it, is it? Very pretty wrote, to be sure;
like print, I swear. Your hand o' write, George?
Why, you was gettin' quite a leadin' man in
this here crew. You'll be cap'n next, I shouldn't
wonder. Just oblige me with that torch again,
will you? this pipe don't draw."
288 TREASURE ISLAND
"Come, now," said George, "you don't fool
this crew no more. You're a funny man, by your
account; but you're over now, and you'll maybe
step down off that barrel, and help vote."
"T thought you said you knowed the rules,"
returned Silver, contemptuously. '"Leastways, if
you don't, I do; and I wait here-and I'm still
your cap'n, mind-till you outs with your
grievances, and I reply; in the meantime, your
black spot ain't worth a biscuit. After that,
we'll see."
"Oh," replied George, "you don't be under
no kind of apprehension; we're all square, we
are. First, you've made a hash of this cruise-
you'll be a bold man to say no to that. Second,
you let the enemy out o' this here trap for
nothing. Why did they want out? I dunno; but
it's pretty plain they wanted it. Third, you
wouldn't let us go at them upon the march. Oh,
20 we see through you, John Silver; you want to
play booty, that's what's wrong with you. And
then, fourth, there's this here boy."
"Ts that all?" asked Silver, quietly.
"Enough, too," retorted George. "We'll all
swing and sun-dry for your bungling."
"Well, now, look here, I'll answer these four
p ints; one after another I'll answer 'em. I made
a hash of this cruise, did I? Well, now, you all
know what I wanted; and you all know, if that
30 had been done, that we'd 'a' been aboard the
ot
[-) 1
if oO
or 2
Tue Brack Spor AGAIN 289
Hispaniola this night as ever was, every man
of us alive, and fit, and full of good plum-duff,
and the treasure in the hold of her, by thunder!
Well, who crossed me? Who forced my hand, as
was the lawful cap'n? Who tipped me the black
spot the day we landed, and began this dance?
Ah, it's a fine dance-I'm with you there-and
looks mighty like a hornpipe in a rope's end at
Execution Dock by London town, it does. But
who done it? Why, it was Anderson, and
Hands, and you, George Merry! And you're
the last above board of that same meddling
crew; and you have the Davy Jones's insolence
to up and stand for cap'n over me-you, that
sank the lot of us! By the powers! but this tops
the stiffest yarn to nothing."
Silver paused, and I could see by the faces of
George and his late comrades that these words
had not been said in vain.
"That's for number one," cried the accused,
wiping the sweat from his brow, for he had been
talking with a vehemence that shook the house.
"Why, I give you my word, I'm sick to speak
to you. You've neither sense nor memory, and
I leave it to fancy where your mothers was that
let you come to sea. Sea! Gentlemen o' fortune!
I reckon tailors is your trade."
"Go on, John," said Morgan. "Speak up to
the others."
"Ah, the others!" returned John. "They're a
or
i) i]
Or
1 c-}
oO ul
290 TREASURE ISLAND
nice lot, ain't they? You say this cruise is
bungled. Ah! by gum, if you could understand
how bad it's bungled, you would see! We're
that near the gibbet that my neck's stiff with
thinking on it. You've seen 'em, maybe, hanged
in chains, birds about 'em, seamen p'inting 'em
out as they go down with the tide. 'Who's that?'
says one. 'That! Why, that's John Silver. I
knowed him well,' says another. And you can
hear the chains a-jangle as you go about and
reach for the other buoy. Now, that's about
where we are, every mother's son of us, thanks
to him, and Hands, and Anderson, and other
ruination fools of you. And if you want to know
about number four, and that boy, why, shiver
my timbers! isn't he a hostage? Are we a-going
to waste a hostage? No, not us; he might be
our last chance, and I shouldn't wonder. Kill
that boy? Not me, mates! And number three?
Ah, well, there's a deal to say to number three.
Maybe you don't count it nothing to have a
real college doctor come to see you every day
-you, John, with your head broke-or you,
George Merry, that had the ague shakes upon
you not six hours agone, and has your eyes the
colour of lemon peel to this same moment on
the clock? And maybe, perhaps, you didn't
know there was a consort coming, either? But
there is; and not so long till then; and we'll see
who'll be glad to have a hostage when it comes
THE Biack Spot AGAIN 291
to that. And as for number two, and why I
made a bargain-well, you came crawling on
your knees to me to make it-on your knees
you came, you was that downhearted-and
you'd have starved, too, if I hadn't-but that's
a trifle! you look there-that's why!"
And he cast down upon the floor a paper that
I instantly recognised-none other than the
chart on yellow paper, with the three red
crosses, that I had found in the oilcloth at the
bottom of the captain's chest. Why the doctor
had given it to him was more than I could
fancy.
But if it were inexplicable to me, the appear-
ance of the chart was incredible to the surviv-
ing mutineers. They leaped upon it like cats
upon a mouse. It went from hand to hand, one
tearing it from another; and by the oaths and
the cries and the childish laughter with which
they accompanied their examination, you would
have thought, not only they were fingering the
very gold, but were at sea with it, besides, in
safety.
"Ves," said one, "that's Flint, sure enough.
J. F., and a score below, with a clove hitch to
it; so he done ever."
"Mighty pretty," said George. "But how are
we to get away with it, and us no ship?"
Silver suddenly sprang up, and supporting
himself with a hand against the wall: '""Now I
292 TREASURE ISLAND
give you warning, George," he cried. "One more
word of your sauce, and J'll call you down and
fight you. How? Why, how do I know? You had
ought to tell me that-you and the rest, that
5 lost me my schooner, with your interference,
burn: you! But not you, you can't; you hain't
got the invention of a cockroach. But civil you
can speak, and shall, George Merry, you may
lay to that."
i9 "That's fair enow,"' said the old man Mor-
gan.
"Fair! I reckon so," said the sea-cook. "You
lost the ship; I found the treasure. Who's the
better man at that? And now I resign, by thun-
15 der! Elect whom you please to be your cap'n
now; I'm done with it."
"Silver!" they cried. "Barbecue for ever!
Barbecue for cap'n!"
"So that's the toon, is it?" cried the cook.
20 "George, I reckon you'll have to wait another
turn, friend; and lucky for you as I'm not a
revengeful man. But that was never my way.
And now, shipmates, this black spot? 'Tain't
much good now, is it? Dick's crossed his luck
25 and spoiled his Bible, and that's about all."
"Tt'll do to kiss the book on° still, won't it?"
growled Dick, who was evidently uneasy at the
curse he had brought upon himself.
"A Bible with a bit cut out!" returned Silver,
THE Biack Spot AGAIN 293
derisively. '"Not it. It don't bind no more'n a
ballad-book."
"Don't it, though?" cried Dick, with a sort
of joy. "Well, I reckon that's worth having,
too."
"Here, Jim-here's a cur'osity for you," said
Silver; and he tossed me the paper.
It was a round, about the size of a crown
piece. One side was blank, for it had been the
last leaf; the other contained a verse or two
of Revelation-these words among the rest,
which struck sharply home upon my mind:
"Without are dogs and murderers." The printed
side had been blackened with wood ash, which
already began to come off and soil my fingers;
on the blank side had been written with the
same material the one word "Depposed.'' I have
that curiosity beside me at this moment; but
not a trace of writing now remains beyond a
single scratch, such as a man might make with
his thumb-nail.
That was the end of the night's business.
Soon after, with a drink all round, we lay down
to sleep, and the outside of Silver's vengeance
was to put George Merry up for sentinel, and
threaten him with death if he should prove
unfaithful.
It was long ere I could close an eye, and
Heaven knows I had matter enough for thought
1 Pa
oO
wai
oO
294 TREASURE ISLAND
in the man whom I had slain that afternoon,
in my own most perilous position, and, above
all, in the remarkable game that I saw Silver
now engaged upon-keeping the mutineers to-
gether with one hand, and grasping, with the
other, after every means, possible and impos-
sible, to make his peace and save his miserable
life. He himself slept peacefully, and snored
aloud; yet my heart was sore for him, wicked
as he was, to think on the dark perils that en-
vironed,° and the shameful gibbet that awaited
him. .
CHAPTER XXX
On PAROLE
I was wakened-indeed, we were all wak-
ened, for I could see even the sentinel shake
himself together from where he had fallen
against the door-post-by a clear, hearty voice
hailing us from the margi# of the wood: -
"Block-house, ahoy!" it cried. '""Here's the
doctor."
And the doctor it was. Although I was glad
to hear the sound, yet my gladness was not
without admixture. I remembered with confu-
sion my insubordinate and stealthy conduct;
and when I saw where it had brought me-
among what companions and surrounded by
what dangers-I felt ashamed to look him in
the face.
He must have risen in the dark, for the day
had hardly come; and when [ ran to a loop-
hole and looked out, I saw him standing, like
Silver once before, up to the mid-leg in creep-
ing vapour.
"You, doctor! Top o' the morning to you,
sir!" cried Silver, broad awake and beaming
with good nature in a moment. "Bright and
on
or
1 oO
296 TREASURE ISLAND
early, to be sure; and it's the early bird as the
saying goes, that gets the rations. George, shake
up your timbers, son, and help Dr. Livesey
over the ship's side. All a-doin' well, your pa-
tients was-all well and merry."
So he pattered on, standing on the hill-top,
with his crutch under his elbow, and one hand
upon the side of the log-house-quite the old
John in voice, manner, and expression.
"We've quite a surprise for you, too, sir,"
he continued. "We've a little stranger here-
he! he! A noo boa@tder and lodger, sir, and
looking fit and taut as a fiddle; slep' like a
supercargo,° he did, right alongside of John-
stem to stem we was, all night."
Dr. Livesey was by this time across the
stockade and pretty near the cook; and I could
hear the alteration in his voice as he said: -
"Not Jim?"
"The very same Jim as ever was," says
Silver. ;
The doctor stopped outright, although he did
not speak, and it was some seconds before he
seemed able to move on.
"Well, well," he said, at last, "duty first and
pleasure afterwards, as you might have said
yourself, Silver. Let us overhaul these patients
of yours."
A moment afterwards he had entered the
block-house, and, with one grim nod to me,
ON ParROLE 297
proceeded with his work among the sick. He
seemed under no apprehension, though he must
have known that his life, among these treach-
erous demons, depended on a hair; and he rat-
tled on to his patients as if he were paying an
ordinary professional visit in a quiet English
family. His manner, I suppose, reacted on the
men; for they behaved to him as if nothing
had occurred-as if he were still ship's doctor,
and they still faithful hands before the mast.
"Youre doing well, my friend,' he said to
the fellow with the bandaged head, ''and if ever
any person had a close shave, it was you; your
head must be as hard as iron. Well, George,
how goes it? You're a pretty colour, certainly;
why, your liver, man, is upside down. Did you
take that medicine? Did he take that medicine,
men?"
"Ay, ay, sir, he took it, sure enough," re-
turned Morgan.
"Because, you see, since I am mutineers' doc-
tor, or prison doctor, as I prefer to call it," says
Dr. Livesey, in his pleasantest way, "I make it
a point of honour not to lose a man for King
George (God bless him!) and the gallows."
The rogues looked at each other, but swal-
lowed the home thrust in silence.
"Dick don't feel well, sir," said one.
"Don't he?" replied the doctor. "Well, step
up here, Dick, and let me see your tongue. No,
oO
1 f-)
1 or
298 TREASURE ISLAND
I should be surprised if he did! the man's
tongue is fit to frighten the French. Another
fever."
"Ah, there," said Morgan, "that comed of
spiling Bibles."
"That comed-as you call it-of being ar-
rant asses," retorted the doctor, "and not hav-
ing sense enough to know honest air from poi-
son, and the dry land from a vile, pestiferous
slough. I think it most probable-though, of
course, it's only an opinion-that you'll all have
the deuce to pay before you get that malaria
out of your systems. Camp in a bog, would
you? Silver, I'm surprised at you. You're less
of a fool than many, take you all around; but
you don't appear to me to have the rudiments
of a notion of the rules of health."
"Well," he added, after he had dosed them
round, and they had taken his prescriptions,
with really laughable humility, more like char-
ity school-children than blood-guilty mutineers
and pirates-''well, that's done for today. And
now I should wish to have a talk with that
boy, please."
And he nodded his head in my direction
carelessly.
George Merry was at the door, spitting and
sputtering over some bad-tasted medicine; but
at the first word of the doctor's proposal he
ON PAROLE 299
swung round with a deep flush, and cried "No!"
and swore.
Silver struck the barrel with his open hand.
"Si-lence!"' he roared, and looked about him
positively like a lion. "Doctor," he went on, in
his usual tones, "I was a-thinking of that, know-
ing as how you had a fancy for the boy. We're
all humbly grateful for your kindness, and, as
you see, puts faith in you, and takes the drugs
down like that much grog. And I take it I've
found a way as'll suit all. Hawkins, will you
give me your word of honour as a young gentle-
man-for a young gentleman you are, although
poor born-your word of honour not to slip
I readily gave the pledge required.
"Then, doctor," said Silver, "you just step
outside o' that stockade, and once you're there,
Ill bring the boy down on the inside, and I
reckon you can yarn through the spars. Good
day to you, sir, and all our dooties to the squire
and Cap'n Smollett."
The explosion of disapproval, which nothing
but Silver's black looks had restrained, broke
out immediately the doctor had left the house.
Silver was roundly accused of playing double-
of trying to make a separate peace for himself
-of sacrificing the interests of his accomplices
and victims; and, in one word, of the identical,
On
H o
ima)
ot 1
300 TREASURE ISLAND
exact thing that he was doing. It seemed to
me so obvious, in this case, that I could not
imagine how he was to turn their anger. But
he was twice the man the rest were; and his
last night's victory had given him a huge pre-
ponderance® on their minds. He called them all
the fools and dolts you can imagine, said it
was necessary I should talk to the doctor, flut-
tered the chart in their faces, asked them if
they could afford to break the treaty the very
day they were bound a-treasure-hunting.
"No, by thunder!" he cried, "it's us must
break the treaty when the time comes; and till
then I'll gammon® that doctor, if I have to ile
his boots with brandy."
And then he bade them get the fire lit, and
stalked out upon his crutch, with his hand on
my shoulder, leaving them in a disarray, and
silenced by his volubility° rather than con-
vinced.
"Slow, lad, slow," he said. "They might
round upon us in a twinkle of an eye, if we
was seen to hurry."
Very deliberately, then, did we advance
across the sand to where the doctor awaited us
on the other side of the stockade, and as soon
as we were within easy speaking distance, Sil-
ver stopped.
"You'll make a note of this here also, doc-
tor," says he, "and the boy'll tell you how I
On PAROLE 301
saved his life, and were deposed for it, too, and
you may lay to that. Doctor, when a man's
steering as near the wind as me-playing
chuck-farthing with the last breath in his body,
like-you wouldn't think it too much, mayhap,
to give him one good word? You'll please bear
in mind it's not my life only now-it's that
boy's into the bargain; and you'll speak me
fair, doctor, and give me a bit o' hope to go on,
for the sake of mercy." ;
Silver was a changed man, once he was out
there and had his back to his friends and the
block-house; his cheeks seemed to have fallen
in, his voice trembled; never was a soul more
dead in earnest.
"Why, John, you're not afraid?" asked Dr.
Livesey.
"Doctor, 'm no coward; no, not I-not so
much!" and he snapped his fingers. "If I was
I wouldn't say it. But T'll own up fairly, I've
the shakes upon me for the gallows. You're a
good man and a true; I never seen a better
man! And you'll not forget what I done good,
not any more than you'll forget the bad, I
know. And I step aside-see here-and leave
you and Jim alone. And you'll put that down
for me, too, for it's a long stretch, is that!"
So saying, he stepped back a little way, till
he was out of earshot, and there sat down upon
a tree-stump and began to whistle; spinning
oO
"302 TREASURE ISLAND
round now and again upon his seat so as to
command a sight, sometimes of me and the
doctor, and sometimes of his unruly ruffians as
they went to and fro in the sand, between the
fire-which they were busy rekindling-and
the house, from which they brought forth pork
and bread to make the breakfast.
"So, Jim," said the doctor, sadly, "here you
are. As you have brewed, so shall you drink,
my boy. Heaven knows, I cannot find it in my
heart to blame you; but this much I will say,
be it kind or unkind: when Captain Smollett
was well, you dared not have gone off; and
when he was ill, and couldn't help it, by George,
it was downright cowardly!"
I will own that I here began to weep. "'Doc-
tor,' I said, "you might spare me. I have
blamed myself enough; my life's forfeit any-
way, and I should have been dead by now, if
Silver hadn't stood for me; and doctor, believe
this, I can die-and I daresay I deserve it-but
what I fear is torture. If they come to torture TOs .
"Jim," the doctor interrupted, and his voice
was quite changed, "Jim, I can't have this.
Whip over, and we'll run for it."
"Doctor," said I, "I passed my word."
"T know, I know," he cried. '""We can't help
that, Jim, now. Ill take it on my shoulders,
30 holus bolus,° blame and shame, my boy; but
oO
i So
H On
2 ot
ON PAROLE 303
stay here, I cannot let you. Jump! One jump,
and you're out, and we'll run for it like an-
telopes."
"No," I replied, "you know right well you
wouldn't do the thing yourself; neither you,
nor squire, nor captain; and no more will I.
Silver trusted me; I passed my word, and back
I go. But, doctor, you did not let me finish. If
they come to torture me, I might let slip a
word of where the ship is; for I got the ship,
part by luck and part by risking, and she lies
in North Inlet, on the southern beach, and just
below high water. At half tide she must be high
and dry."
"The ship!" 'exclaimed the doctor.
Rapidly I described to him my adventures,
and he heard me out in silence.
"There is a kind of fate in this," he observed,
when I had done. "Every step, it's you that
saves our lives; and do you suppose by any
chance that we are going to let you lose yours?
That would be a poor return, my boy. You
found out the plot; you found Ben Gunn-the
best deed that ever you did, or will do, though
you live to ninety. Oh, by Jupiter, and talking
of Ben Gunn! why, this is the mischief in per-
son. Silver," he cried, '"'Silver-Ill give you a
piece of advice," he continued, as the cook
drew-near again; "don't you be in any great
hurry after that treasure."
cu
a >
304 TREASURE ISLAND
"Why, sir, I do my possible, which that
ain't,' said Silver. "I can only, asking your
pardon, save my life and the boy's by seeking
for that treasure; and you may lay to that."
"Well, Silver," replied the doctor, "if that
is so, Pll go one step further: look out for
squalls when you find it."
"Sir," said Silver, "as between man and man,
that's too much and too little. What you're
after, why you left the block-house, why you've
given me that there chart, I don't know, now,
do I? and yet I done your bidding with my
eyes shut and never a word of hope! But no,
this here's too much. If you won't tell me what
you mean plain out, just say so, and Ill leave
the helm."
"No," said the doctor, musingly, "I've no
right to say more; it's not my secret, you see,
Silver, or, I give you my word, I'd tell it you.
20 But Ill go as far with you as I dare go, and
a step beyond; for I'll have my wig sorted by
the captain or I'm mistaken! And, first, Ill
give you a bit of hope: Silver, if we both get
alive out of this wolf-trap, [ll do my best to
25 save you, short of perjury."
Silver's face was radiant. "You couldn't say
more, I'm sure, sir, not if you was my mother,"
he cried.
"Well, that's my first concession," added the
30 doctor. "'My second is a piece of advice: Keep
or
1 i=)
1 ot
ON PAROLE 305
the boy close beside you, and when you need
help, halloo. I'm off to seek it for you, and that
itself will show you if I speak at random.
Good-bye, Jim."
And Dr. Livesey shook hands with me 5
through the stockade, nodded to Silver, and set
off at a brisk pace into the wood.
oO
Oo
Oo
CHAPTER XXXI
Tue TREASURE HUNT-FLINT's POINTER®
"Jim," said Silver, when we were alone, "if
I saved your life, you saved mine; and [ll not
forget it. I seen the doctor waving you to run
for it-with the tail of my eye, I did; and I
seen you say no, as plain as hearing. Jim
that's one to you. This is the first glint of hope
I had since the attack failed, and I owe it
to you. And now, Jim, we're to go in for this
here treasure-hunting, with sealed orders, too,
and I don't like it; and you and me must stick
close, back to back like, and we'll save our
necks in spite o' fate and fortune."
Just then a man hailed us from the fire that
breakfast was ready, and we were soon seated
here and there about the sand over biscuit and
fried junk. They had lit a fire fit to roast an
ox; and it was now grown so hot that they
could only approach it from the windward, and
even there not without precaution. In the same
wasteful spirit, they had cooked, I suppose,
three times more than we could eat; and one
of them, with an empty laugh, threw what was
left into the fire, which blazed and roared again
TREASURE HUNT-FLINT's POINTER 307
over this unusual fuel. I never in my life saw
men so careless of the morrow; hand to mouth
is the only word that can describe their way of
doing; and what with wasted food and sleeping
sentries, though they were bold enough for a
brush and be done with it, I could see their en-
tire unfitness for anything like a prolonged
campaign.
Even Silver, eating away, with Captain Flint
upon his shoulder, had not a word of blame for
their recklessness. And this the more surprised
me, for I thought he had never shown himself
so cunning as he did then.
"Ay, mates," said he, "'it's lucky you have
Barbecue to think for you with this here head.
I got what I wanted, I did. Sure enough, they
have the ship. Where they have it, I don't
know yet; but once we hit the treasure, we'll
have to jump about and find out. And then,
mates, us that has the boats, I reckon, has the
upper hand."
Thus he kept running on, with his mouth
full of the hot bacon: thus he restored their
hope and confidence, and, I more than suspect,
repaired his own at the same time.
"As for hostage," he continued, 'that's his
last talk, I guess, with them he loves so dear.
I've got my piece o' news, and thanky to him
for that; but it's over and done. I'll take him
in a line when we go treasure-hunting, for we'll
308 TREASURE ISLAND
keep him like so much gold, in case of accidents,
you mark, and in the meantime. Once we get
the ship and treasure both, and off to sea like
jolly companions, why, then, we'll talk Mr.
Hawkins over, we will, and we'll give him his
share, to be sure, for all his kindness."
It was no wonder the men were in a good
humour now. For my part, I was horribly cast
down. Should the scheme he had now sketched
10 prove feasible, Silver, already doubly a traitor,
would not hesitate to adopt it. He had still a
foot in either camp, and there was no doubt
he would prefer wealth and freedom with the
pirates to a bare escape from hanging, which
15 was the best he had to hope on our side.
Nay, and even if things so fell out that he
was forced.to keep his faith with Dr. Livesey,
even then what danger lay before us! What a
moment that would be when the suspicions of
20 his followers turned to certainty, and he and I
should have to fight for dear life-he, a cripple,
and I, a boy-against five strong and active
seamen!
Add to this double apprehension, the mystery
that still hung over the behaviour of my
friends; their unexplained desertion of the
stockade; their inexplicable cession of the
chart; or, harder still to understand, the doc-
tor's last warning to Silver, "Look out for
30 squalls when you find it;" and you will readily
oO
or 2
TREASURE HUNT-FLINT's POINTER 309
believe how little taste I found in my breakfast,
and with how uneasy a heart I set forth behind
my captors on the quest for treasure.
We made a curious figure, had anyone been
there to see us; all in soiled sailor clothes, and
all but me armed to the teeth. Silver had two
guns slung about him-one before and one be-
hind-besides the great cutlass at his waist,
and a pistol in each pocket of his square-tailed
coat. To complete his strange appearance, Cap-
tain Flint sat perched upon his shoulder and
gabbling odds and ends of purposeless sea-talk.
I had a line about my waist, and followed obe-
diently after the sea-cook, who held the loose
end of the rope, now in his free hand, now be-
tween his powerful teeth. For all the world, I
was led like a dancing bear.
The other men were variously burthened;
some carrying picks and shovels-for that had
been the very first necessary they brought
ashore from the Hispaniola-others laden with
pork, bread, and brandy for the midday meal.
All the stores, I observed, came from our stock;
and I could see the truth of Silver's words the
night before. Had he not struck a bargain with
the doctor, he and his mutineers, deserted by
the ship, must have been driven to subsist on
clear water and the proceeds of their hunting.
Water would have been little to their taste; a
sailor is not usually a good shot; and, besides
or
iw) 0
5 iw)
oO
il fo)
310 TREASURE ISLAND
all that, when they were so short of eatables,
it was not likely they would be very flush of
powder.
Well, thus equipped, we all set out-even the
fellow with the broken head, who should cer-
tainly have kept in shadow-and straggled, one
after another, to the beach, where the two gigs
awaited us. Even these bore trace of the drunk-
en folly of the pirates, one in a broken thwart,
and both in their muddied and unbaled condi-
tion. Both were to be carried along with us, for
the sake of safety; and so, with our numbers
divided between them, we set forth upon the
bosom of the anchorage.
As we pulled over, there was some discussion
on the chart. The red cross was, of course, far
too large to be a guide; and the terms of the
note on the back, as you will hear, admitted
of some anibiguity: They ran, the reader aa
remember, thus:-
"Tall tree, Spyglass Shoulder, bearing a point to
the N. of N.N.E.
"Skeleton Island E.S.E. and by E.
sen feet:
A tall tree was thus the principal mark. Now,
right before us, the anchorage was bounded by
a plateau from two to three hundred feet high,
adjoining on the north the sloping southern
shoulder of the Spyglass, and rising again to-
TREASURE HuNT-FLINT's PoINTER 311
wards the south into the rough, cliffy eminence
called the Mizzen-mast Hill. The top of the
plateau was dotted thickly with pine trees of
varying height. Every here and there, one of a
different species rose forty or fifty feet clear
above its neighbours, and which of these was
the particular "'tall tree" of Captain Flint could
only be decided on the spot, and by the read-
ings of the compass.
Yet, although that was the case, every man
on board the boats had picked a favourite of
his own ere we were half way over, Long John
alone shrugging his shoulders and bidding them
wait till they were there.
We pulled easily, by Silver's directions, not
to weary the hands prematurely; and, after
quite a long passage, landed at the mouth of the
second river-that which runs down a woody
cleft of the Spyglass. Thence, bending to our
left, we began to ascend the slope towards the
plateau.
At the first outset, heavy, miry ground and
a matted, marish° vegetation, greatly delayed
our progress; but by little and little the hill
began to steepen and become stony under foot,
and the wood to change its character and 6
grow in a more open order. It was, indeed, a
most pleasant portion of the island that we
were now approaching. A heavy-scented broom
and many flowering shrubs had almost taken
co
oO
Bi TREASURE ISLAND
the place of grass. Thickets of green nutmeg
trees were dotted here and there with the red
columns and the broad shadow of the pines;
and the first mingled their spice with the aroma
of the others. The air, besides, was fresh and
stirring, and this, under the sheer sunbeams,
was a wonderful refreshment to our senses.
The party spread itself abroad, in a fan
shape, shouting and leaping to and fro. About
the centre, and a good way behind the rest,
Silver and I followed-lI tethered by my rope,
he ploughing, with deep pants, among the slid-
ing gravel. From time to time, indeed, I had
to lend him a hand, or he must have missed his
footing and fallen backward down the hill.
We had thus proceeded for about half a mile,
and were approaching the brow of the plateau,
when the man upon the farthest left began to
cry aloud, as if in terror. Skout after shout
came from him, and the others began to run
in his direction.
"He can't 'a' found the treasure," said old
Morgan, hurrying past us from the right, "for
that's clean a-top."'
Indeed, as we found when we also reached
the spot, it was something very different. At
the foot of a pretty big pine, and involved in
a green creeper, which had even partly lifted
some of the smaller bones, a human skeleton
lay, with a few shreds of clothing, on the
TREASURE HUNT-FLINT's POINTER 313
ground. I believe a chill struck for a moment to
every heart.
"He was a seaman," said George Merry, who,
bolder than the rest, had gone up close, and
was examining the rags of clothing. '"Least-
ways, this is good sea-cloth."
"Ay, ay,' said Silver, "like enough; you
wouldn't look to find a bishop here, I reckon.
But what sort of a way is that for bones to lie?
'Tain't in natur'." 10
Indeed, on a second glance, it seemed impos-
sible to fancy that the body was in a natural
position. But for some disarray (the work, per-
haps, of the birds that had fed upon him, or
of the slow-growing creeper that had gradually 15
enveloped his remains) the man lay perfectly
straight-his feet pointing in one direction, his
hands, raised above his head like a diver's,
pointing directly in the opposite.
"T've taken a notion into my old numbskull," 20
observed Silver. '"Here's the compass; there's
the tip-top p'int o' Skeleton Island, stickin'
out like a tooth. Just take a bearing, will you,
along the lire of them bones."
It was done. The body pointed straight in 25
the direction of the island, and the compass
read duly E.S.E. and by E.
"T thought so," cried the cook; "this here is
a pinter. Right up there is our line for the
Pole Star and the jolly dollars. But, by thun- :
or
oo So
ot
are a
2 Oo
TA TREASURE ISLAND
der! if it don't make me cold inside to think
of Flint. This is one of Ais jokes, and no mis-
take. Him and these six was alone here; he
killed 'em, every man; and this one he hauled
here and laid down by compass, shiver my tim-
bers! They're long bones, and the hair's been
yellow. Ay, that would be Allardyce. You mind
Allardyce, Tom Morgan?"
"Ay, ay,' returned Morgan, "I mind him;
he owed me money, he did, and took my knife
ashore with him."
"Speaking of knives," said another, "why
don't we find his'n lying round? Flint warn't
the man to pick a seaman's pocket; and the
birds, I guess, would leave it be."
"By the powers, and that's true!" cried
Silver.
"There ain't a thing left here,' said Merry,
still feeling round among the bones, "not a
copper doit° nor a baccy box. It don't look
nat'ral to me."
"No, by gum, it don't," agreed Silver; 'not
nat'ral, nor not nice, says you. Great guns!
messmates, but if Flint was living, this would
be a hot spot for you and me. Six they were,
and six are we; and bones is what they are
-now."
"T saw him dead with these here dead-
lights," said Morgan. "Billy took me in. There
he laid, with penny-pieces on his eyes."
Wy
Sy
Ss TS SSS SS Ss =
SS
WARNIGS GABLE,
FLint's PomnTER
TREASURE HUNT-FLINT's POINTER 317
'""Dead-ay, sure enough he's dead and gone
below," said the fellow with the bandage; 'but
if ever sperrit walked, it would be Flint's. Dear
heart, but he died bad, did Flint!"
"Ay, that he did," observed another; "now
he raged, and now he hollered for the rum, and
now he sang. 'Fifteen Men' were his only song,
mates; and I tell you true, I never rightly liked
to hear it since. It was main hot, and the windy
was open, and I hear that old song comin' out
as clear as clear-and the death-haul on the
man already."
"Come, come," said Silver, "stow this talk.
He's dead, and he don't walk, that I know;
leastways, he won't walk by day, and you may 15
lay to that. Care killed a cat. Fetch ahead for
the doubloons."'
We started, certainly; but in spite of the hot
sun and the staring daylight, the pirates no
longer ran separate and shouting through the
wood, but kept side by side and spoke with
bated breath. The terror of the dead buccaneer
had fallen on their spirits.
iw) i)
on
1 Oo
CHAPTER XXXII
THE TREASURE HUNT-THE VOICE AMONG
THE TREES
PartLy from the damping influence of this
alarm, partly to rest Silver and the sick folk,
the whole party sat down as soon as they had
gained the brow of the ascent.
The plateau being somewhat tilted towards
the west, this spot on which we had paused
commanded a wide prospect on either hand.
Before us, over the tree-tops, we beheld the
Cape of the Woods fringed with surf; behind,
we not only looked down upon the anchorage
and Skeleton Island, but saw-clear across the
spit and the eastern lowlands-a great field of
open sea upon the east. Sheer above us rose the
Spyglass, here dotted with single pines, there
black with precipices. There was no sound but
that of the distant breakers, mounting from
all round, and the chirp of countless insects in
the brush. Not a man, not a sail upon the sea;
the very largeness of the view increased the
sense of solitude.
Silver, as he sat, took certain bearings with
his compass.
THE VOICE AMONG THE TREES. 319
"There are three 'tall trees," said he,
"about in the right line from Skeleton Island.
'Spyglass Shoulder,' I take it, means that lower
pint there. It's child's play to find the stuff
now. I've half a mind to dine first."
"YT don't feel sharp,' growled Morgan.
"Thinkin' o' Flint-I think it were-as done me."
"Ah, well, my son, you praise your stars he's
dead," said Silver.
"He were an ugly devil," cried a third pi-
rate, with a shudder; "that blue in the face,
too!"
"That was how the rum took him," added
Merry. "Blue! well, I reckon he was blue.
That's a true word."
Ever since they had found the skeleton and
got upon this train of thought, they had spoken
lower and lower, and they had almost got to
whispering by now, so that the sound of their :
talk hardly interrupted the silence of the wood.
All of a sudden, out of the middle of the trees
in front of us, a thin, high, trembling voice
struck up the well-known air and words: -
"Fifteen men on the dead man's chest-
Yo-ho-ho, and a bottle of rum!"
I never have seen men more dreadfully af-
fected than the pirates. The colour went from
their six faces like enchantment; some leaped
ot
oO
o
mat
320 TREASURE ISLAND
to their feet, some clawed hold of others; Mor-
gan grovelled on the ground.
"Tt's Flint, by --!" cried Merry.
The song had stopped as suddenly as it be-
gan-broken off, you would have said, in the
middle of a note, as though someone had laid
his hand upon the singer's mouth. Coming so
far through the clear, sunny atmosphere among
the green tree-tops, I thought it had sounded
airily and sweetly; and the effect on my com-
panions was the stranger.
"Come," said Silver, struggling with his
ashen lips to get the word out, "this won't do.
Stand by to go about. This is a rum start, and
I can't name the voice: but it's someone sky-
larking-someone that's flesh and blood, and
you may lay to that."
His courage had come back as he spoke, and
some of the colour to his face along with it.
Already the others had begun to lend an ear
to this encouragement, and were coming a lit-
tle to themselves, when the same voice broke
out again-not this time singing, but in a faint
distant hail, that echoed yet fainter among the
clefts of the Spyglass.
"Darby M'Graw," it wailed-for that is the
word that best describes the sound-Darby
M'Graw! Darby M'Graw!" again and again
and again; and then rising a little higher, and
THE VOICE AMONG THE TREES 321
with an oath that I leave out, "Fetch aft the
rum, Darby!"
The buccaneers remained rooted to the
ground, their eyes starting from their heads.
Long after the voice had died away they still
stared in silence, dreadfully, before them.
"That fixes it!" gasped one. "'Let's go!"
"They was his last words," moaned Morgan,
"his last words above board."
Dick had his Bible out, and was praying
volubly. He had been well brought up, had
Dick, before he came to sea and fell among
bad companions.
Still, Silver was unconquered. I could hear
his teeth rattle in his head; but he had not yet
surrendered.
"Nobody in this here island ever heard of
Darby," he muttered: "not one but us that's
here."' And then, making a great effort, "Ship-
mates," he cried, "I'm here to get that stuff,
and J'll not be beat by man nor devil. I never
was feared of Flint in his life, and, by the
powers, I'll face him dead. There's seven hun-
dred thousand pound not a quarter of a mile
from here. When did ever a gentleman o' for-
tune show his stern to that much dollars, for
a boosy old seaman with a blue mug-and him
dead, too?"
But there was no sign of re-awakening cour-
oOo
roe wm
B22 TREASURE ISLAND
age in his followers; rather, indeed, of growing
terror at the irreverence of his words.
"Belay there, John!" said Merry. "Don't
you cross a sperrit."
5 And the rest were all too terrified to reply.
They would have run away severally had they
dared; but fear kept them together, and kept
them close by John, as if his daring helped
them. He, on his part, had pretty well fought
10 his weakness down.
"Sperrit? Well, maybe," he said. "But there's
one thing not clear to me. There was an echo.
Now, no man ever seen a sperrit with a shad-
ow; well, then, what's he doing with an echo
15 to him, I should like to know? That ain't in
natur', surely?"
This argument seemed weak enough to me.
But you can never tell what will affect the su-
perstitious, and, to my wonder, George Merry
20 was greatly relieved.
"Well, that's so," he said. '""You've a head
upon your shoulders, John, and no mistake.
'Bout ship, mates! This here crew is on a
wrong tack, I do believe. And come to think on
25 it, it was like Flint's voice, I grant you, but not
just so clear-away like it, after all. It was liker
somebody else's voice now-it was liker---"
"By the powers, Ben Gunn!" roared Silver.
"Ay, and so it were," cried Morgan, spring-
30 ing on his knees. "Ben Gunn it were!"
THE VOICE AMONG THE TREES 323
"Tt don't make much odds, do it, now?"
asked Dick. "Ben Gunn's not here in the body,
any more'n Flint."
But the older hands greeted this remark
with scorn.
"Why, nobody minds Ben Gunn," cried
Merry; 'dead or alive, nobody minds him."
It was extraordinary how their spirits had
returned, and how the natural colour had re-
vived in their faces. Soon they were chatting to-
gether, with intervals of listening; and not long
after, hearing no further sound, they shouldered
the tools and set forth again, Merry walking
first with Silver's compass to keep them on
the right line with Skeleton Island. He had said
the truth; dead or alive, nobody minded Ben
Gunn.
Dick alone still held his Bible, and looked
around him as he went, with fearful glances;
but he found no sympathy, and Silver even
joked him on his precautions.
"T told you," said he-"I told you, you had
spiled your Bible. If it ain't no good to swear
by, what do you suppose a sperrit would give
for it? Not that!" and he snapped his big
fingers, halting a moment on his crutch.
But Dick was not to be comforted; indeed,
it was soon plain to me that the lad was falling
sick; hastened by heat, exhaustion, and the
shock of his alarm, the fever, predicted by Dr.
Ww o
or
1 oO
324 TREASURE ISLAND
Livesey, was evidently growing swiftly higher.
It was fine open walking here, upon the sum-
mit; our way lay a little down-hill, for, as I
have said, the plateau tilted towards the west.
The pines, great and small, grew wide apart;
and even between the clumps of nutmeg and
azalea, wide open spaces baked in the hot sun-
shine. Striking, as we did, pretty near north-
west across the island, we drew, on the one
hand, ever nearer under the shoulders of the
Spyglass, and on the other, looked ever wider
over that western bay where I had once tossed
and trembled in the coracle.
The first of the tall trees was reached, and
by the bearing, proved the wrong one. So with
the second. The third rose nearly two hundred
feet into the air above a clump of underwood;
a giant of a vegetable, with a red column as
big as a cottage, and a wide shadow around in
which a company could have manceuvred. It
was conspicuous far to sea both on the east and
west, and might have been entered as a sailing
mark upon the chart.
But it was not its size that now iaoresced my
companions; it was the knowledge that seven
hundred thousand pounds in gold lay some-
where buried below its spreading shadow. The
thought of the money, as they drew nearer,
swallowed up their previous terrors. Their eyes
burned in their heads; their feet grew speedier
THE VOICE AMONG THE TREES 325
and lighter; their whole soul was bound up
in that fortune, that whole lifetime of extrava-
gance and pleasure, that lay waiting there for
each of them.
Silver hobbled, grunting, on his crutch; his
nostrils stood out and quivered; he cursed like
'a madman when the flies settled on his hot and
shiny countenance; he plucked furiously at the
line that held me to him, and, from time to time,
turned his eyes upon me with a deadly look.
Certainly he took no pains to hide his
thoughts; and certainly I read them like print.
In the immediate nearness of the gold, all else
had been forgotten; his promise and the doc-
tor's warning were both things of the past; and
I could not doubt that he hoped to seize upon
the treasure, find and board the Hispaniola un-
der cover of night, cut every honest throat
about that island, and sail away as he had at
first intended, laden with crimes and riches.
Shaken as I was with these alarms, it was
hard for me to keep up with the rapid pace of
the treasure-hunters. Now and again I stum-
bled; and it was then that Silver plucked so
roughly at the rope and launched at me his
murderous glances. Dick, who had dropped be-
hind us, and now brought up the rear, was bab-
bling to himself both prayers and curses, as his
fever kept rising. This also added to my wretch-
edness, and, to crown all, I was haunted by the
oO
i Oo
eo >)
oO
326 TREASURE ISLAND
thought of the tragedy that had once been acted
on that plateau, when that ungodly buccaneer
with the blue face-he who died at Savannah,
singing and shouting for drink-had there, with
his own hand, cut down his six accomplices.
This grove, that was now so peaceful, must
then have rung with cries, I thought; and even
with the thought I could believe I heard it
ringing still.
We were now at the margin of the thicket.
"Huzza, mates, all together!" shouted
Merry; and the foremost broke into a run.
And suddenly, not ten yards further, we be-
held them stop. A low cry arose. Silver doubled
his pace, digging away with the foot of his
crutch like one possessed; and next moment he
and I had come also to a dead halt.
Before us was a great excavation, not very
recent, for the sides had fallen in and grass had
sprouted on the bottom. In this were the shaft
of a pick broken in two and the boards of sev-
eral packing-cases strewn around. On one of
these boards I saw, branded with a hot iron,
the name Walrus-the name of Flint's ship.
All was clear to probation.° The cache had
been found and rifled: the seven hundred thou-
sand pounds were gone!
4 g S ; 3
Tue Empty CACHE
CHAPTER XXXIII
THE FALL OF A CHIEFTAIN
THERE never was such an overturn in this
world. Each of these six men was as though he
had been struck. But with Silver the blow
passed almost instantly. Every thought of his
soul had been set full-stretch, like a racer, on
that money; well, he was brought up in a single
second, dead; and he kept his head, found his
temper, and changed his plan before the others
had had time to realise the disappointment.
"Jim," he whispered, "take that, and stand
by for trouble."
And he passed me a double-barrelled pistol.
At the same time he began quietly moving
northward, and in a few steps had put the
hollow between us two and the other five. Then
he looked at me and nodded, as much as to
say, ""Here is a narrow corner," as, indeed, I
thought it was. His looks were now quite
friendly; and I was so revolted at these con-
stant changes, that I could not forbear whis-
pering, "So you've changed sides again."
There was no time left for him to answer in.
The buccaneers, with oaths and cries, began to
on
Oo
330 TREASURE ISLAND
leap, one after another, into the pit, and to dig
with their fingers, throwing the boards aside as
they did so. Morgan found a piece of gold. He
held it up with a perfect spout of oaths. It was
a two-guinea piece, and it went from hand to
hand among them for a quarter of a minute.
"Two guineas!" roared Merry, shaking it at
Silver. '""That's your seven hundred thousand
pounds, is it? You're the man for bargains,
ain't you? You're him that never bungled noth-
ing, you wooden-headed lubber!"
"Dig away, boys," said Silver, with the cool-
est insolence; "you'll find some pig-nuts and I
shouldn't wonder."
"Pig-nuts!"? repeated Merry, in a scream.
"Mates, do you hear that? I tell you, now, that
man there knew it all along. Look in the face
of him, and you'll see it wrote there."
"Ah, Merry," remarked Silver, "standing for
cap'n again? You're a pushing lad, to be sure."
But this time everyone was entirely in Mer-
ry's favour. They began to scramble out of the
excavation, darting furious glances behind
them. One thing I observed, which looked well
for us: they all got out upon the opposite side
from Silver.
Well, there we stood, two on one side, five
on the other, the pit between us, and nobody
screwed up high enough to offer the first blow.
Silver never moved; he watched them, very
THE Fatt oF A CHIEFTAIN 331
upright on his crutch, and looked as cool as
ever I saw him. He was brave, and no mistake.
At last, Merry seemed to think a speech
might help matters.
"Mates," says he, '"'there's two of them alone
there; one's the old cripple that brought us all
here and blundered us down to this; the other's
that cub that I mean to have the heart of. Now,
mates ee
He was raising his arm and his voice, and
plainly meant to lead a charge. But just then
-crack! crack! crack!-three musket-shots
flashed out of the thicket. Merry tumbled head
foremost into the excavation; the man with the
bandage spun round like a teetotum,° and fell
all his length upon his side, where he lay dead,
but still twitching; and the other three turned
and ran for it with all their might.
Before you could wink, Long John had fired
two barrels of a pistol into the struggling
Merry; and as the man rolled up his eyes at
him in the last agony, "George," said he, "I
reckon I settled you."
At the same moment the doctor, Gray, and
Ben Gunn joined us, with smoking muskets,
from among the nutmeg trees.
"Forward!" cried the doctor. "Double quick,
my lads. We must head 'em off the boats."
And we set off at a great pace, sometimes
plunging through the bushes to the chest.
oO
332 TREASURE ISLAND
I tell you, but Silver was anxious to keep up
with us. The work that man went through,
leaping on his crutch till the muscles of his
chest were fit to burst, was work no sound man
ever equalled; and so thinks the doctor. As it
was, he was already thirty yards behind us, and
on the verge of strangling, when we reached
the brow of the slope.
"Doctor," he hailed, "see there! no hurry!"
Sure enough there was no hurry. In a more
open part of the plateau, we could see the three
survivors still running in the same direction as
they had started, right for Mizzen-mast Hill.
We were already between them and the boats;
and so we four sat down to breathe, while Long
John, mopping his face, came slowly up with us.
"Thank ye kindly, doctor," says he. "You
came in in about the nick, I guess, for me and
Hawkins. And so it's you, Ben Gunn!" he
added. "'Well, you're a nice one, to be sure."
"Y'm Ben Gunn, I am," replied the maroon,
wriggling like an eel in his embarrassment.
"And," he added, after a long pause, "how do
Mr. Silver? Pretty well, I thank ye, says you."
"Ben, Ben," murmured Silver, "to think as
you've done me!"
The doctor sent back Gray for one of the
pickaxes, deserted, in their flight, by the muti-
neers; and then as we proceeded leisurely down
hill to where the boats were lying, related, in
THE FALL oF A CHIEFTAIN Ba
a few words, what had taken place. It was a
story that profoundly interested Silver; and
Ben Gunn, the half-idiot maroon, was the hero
from beginning to end.
Ben, in his long, lonely wanderings about the :
island, had found the skeleton-it was he that
had rifled it; he had found the treasure; he had
dug it up (it was the haft of his pickaxe that
lay broken in the excavation); he had carried
it on his back, in many weary journeys, from
the foot of the tall pine to a cave he had on the
two-pointed hill at the north-east angle of the
island, and there it had lain stored in safety
since two months before the arrival of the His-
paniola.
When the doctor had wormed this secret
from him, on the afternoon of the attack, and
when, next morning, he saw the anchorage de-
serted, he had gone to Silver, given him the
chart, which was now useless-given him the
stores, for Ben Gunn's cave was well supplied
with goats' meat salted by himself-given any-
thing and everything to get a chance of moving
in safety from the stockade to the two-pointed
hill, there to be clear of malaria and keep a
guard upon the money.
"As for you, Jim," he said, "it went against
my heart, but I did what I thought best for
those who had stood by their duty; and if you
were not one of these, whose fault was it?"
OU
334 TREASURE ISLAND
That morning, finding that I was to be in-
volved in the horrid disappointment he had
prepared for the mutineers, he had run all the
way to the cave, and, leaving the squire to
guard the captain, had taken Gray and the
maroon, and started, making the diagonal across
the island, to be at hand beside the pine. Soon,
however, he saw that our party had the start
of him; and Ben Gunn, being fleet of foot, had
10 been despatched in front to do his best alone.
Then it had occurred to him to work upon the
superstitions of his former shipmates; and he
was so far successful that Gray and the doctor
had come up and were already ambushed be-
fore the arrival of the treasure-hunters.
"Ah," said Silver, ''it were fortunate for me
that I had Hawkins here. You would have let
old John be cut to bits, and never given it a
thought, Doctor."
20 "Not a thought," replied Dr. Livesey, cheer-
ily.
And by this time we had reached the gigs.
The doctor, with the pickaxe, demolished one
of them, and then we all got aboard the other,
and set out to go round by sea for North Inlet.
This was a run of eight or nine miles. Silver,
though he was almost killed already with fa-
tigue, was set to an oar, like the rest of us,
and we were soon skimming swiftly over a
30 smooth sea. Soon we passed out of the straits
ot
oO al
ot 2
Tue FALL or A CHIEFTAIN £3
and doubled the south-east corner of the island,
round which, four days ago, we had towed the
Hispaniola.
As we passed the two-pointed hill, we could
see the black mouth of Ben Gunn's cave, and
a figure standing by it, leaning on a musket. It
_ was the squire; and we waved a handkerchief
and gave him three cheers, in which the voice
of Silver joined as heartily as any.
Three miles farther, just inside the mouth of
North Inlet, what should we meet but the His-
paniola, cruising by herself? The last flood had
lifted her; and had there been much wind, or
a strong tide current, as in the southern an-
chorage, we should never have found her more,
or found her stranded beyond help. As it was,
there was little amiss, beyond the wreck of the
mainsail. Another anchor was got ready, and
dropped in a fathom and a half of water. We
all pulled round again to Rum Cove, the near-
est point for Ben Gunn's treasure-house; and
then Gray, single-handed, returned with the gig
to the Hispaniola, where he was to pass the
night on guard.
A gentle slope ran up from the beach to the
entrance of the cave. At the top, the squire met
us. To me he was cordial and kind, saying
nothing of my escapade, either in the way of
blame or praise. At Silver's polite salute he
somewhat flushed.
5 ry
i) 0
336 TREASURE ISLAND
"John Silver," he said, "you're a prodigious
villain and impostor-a monstrous impostor,
sir. I am told I am not to prosecute you. Well,
then, I will not. But the dead men, sir, hang
5 about your neck like millstones."
"Thank you kindly, sir," replied Long John,
again saluting.
"J dare you to thank me!" cried the squire.
"Tt is a gross dereliction® of my duty. Stand
10 back."
And thereupon we all entered the cave. It
was a large, airy place, with a little spring and
a pool of clear water, overhung with ferns. The
floor was sand. Before a big fire lay Captain
15 Smollett; and in a far corner, only duskily
flickered over by the blaze, I beheld great heaps
of coin and quadrilaterals built of bars of gold.
That was Flint's treasure that we had come so
far to seek, and that had cost already the lives
20 of seventeen men from the Hispaniola. How
many it had cost in the amassing, what blood
and sorrow, what good ships scuttled on the
deep, what brave men walking the plank blind-
fold, what shot of cannon, what shame and lies
25 and cruelty, perhaps no man alive could tell.
Yet there were still three upon that island-
Silver, and old Morgan, and Ben Gunn-who
had each taken his share in these crimes, as
each had hoped in vain to share in the reward.
30 "Come in, Jim," said the captain. '"You're a
THE FALL oF A CHIEFTAIN Bae
good boy in your line, Jim; but I don't think
you and me'll go to sea again. You're too much
of the born favourite for me. Is that you, John
Silver? What brings you here, man?"
. "Come back tomy dooty, sir,"
Silver.
"Ah!" said the captain; and that was all he
said.
What a supper I had of it that night, with
all my friends around me; and what a meal
it was, with Ben Gunn's salted goat, and some
delicacies and a bottle of old wine from the His-
paniola. Never, I am sure, were people gayer or
happier. And there was Silver, sitting back al-
most out of the firelight, but eating heartily,
prompt to spring forward when anything was
wanted, even joining quietly in our laughter-
the same bland, polite, obsequious® seaman of
the voyage out.
returned
oO
1 iS
CHAPTER XXXIV
ANpD LAST
THE next morning we fell early to work, for
the transportation of this great mass of gold
near a mile by land to the beach, and thence
three miles by boat to the Hispaniola, was a
considerable task for so small a number of
workmen. 'The three fellows still abroad upon
the island did not greatly trouble us; a single
sentry on the shoulder of the hill was sufficient
to insure us against any sudden onslaught, and
we thought, besides, they had had more than
enough of fighting.
Therefore the work was pushed on briskly.
Gray and Ben Gunn came and went with the
boat, while the rest, during their absences, piled
treasure on the beach. Two of the bars, slung
in a rope's-end, made a good load for a grown
man-one that he was glad to walk slowly with.
For my part, as I was not much use at carry-
ing, I was kept busy all day in the cave, pack-
ing the minted money into bread-bags.
It was a strange collection, like Billy Bones's
hoard for the diversity of coinage, but so much
larger and so much more varied that I think I
AND Last 339
never had more pleasure than in sorting them.
English, French, Spanish, Portuguese, Georges,
and Louises, doubloons and double guineas
and moidores® and sequins,° the pictures of all
the kings of Europe for the last hundred years,
strange Oriental pieces stamped with what
looked like wisps of string or bits of spider's
web, round pieces and square pieces, and pieces
bored through the middle, as if to wear them
round your neck-nearly every variety of
money in the world must, I think, have found
a place in that collection; and for number, I
am sure they were like autumn leaves, so that
my back ached with stooping and my fingers
with sorting them out.
Day after day this work went on; by every
evening a fortune had been stowed aboard, but
there was another fortune waiting for the mor-
row; and all this time we heard nothing of the
three surviving mutineers.
At last-I think it was on the third night-
the doctor and I were strolling on the shoulder
of the hill where it overlooks the lowlands of
the isle, when, from out the thick darkness
below, the wind brought us a noise between
shrieking and singing. It was only a snatch
that reached our ears, followed by the former
silence.
"Heaven forgive them," said the doctor, " 'tis
the mutineers!"'
ol
340 TREASURE ISLAND
"All drunk, sir," struck in the voice of Silver
from behind us.
Silver, I should say, was allowed his entire
liberty, and, in spite of daily rebuffs, seemed to
5 regard himself once more as quite a privileged
and friendly dependent. Indeed, it was remark-
able how well he bore these slights, and with
what unwearying politeness he kept on trying
to ingratiate° himself with all. Yet, I think,
10 none treated him better than a dog; unless it
was Ben Gunn, who was still terribly afraid of
his old quartermaster, or myself, who had really
something to thank him for; although for that
matter, I suppose, I had reason to think even
15 worse of him than anybody else, for I had seen
him meditating a fresh treachery upon the
plateau. Accordingly, it was pretty gruffly that
the doctor answered him.
"Drunk or raving," said he.
20 "Right you were, sir," replied Silver; 'and
precious little odds which, to you and me."
"T suppose you would hardly ask me to call
you a humane man," returned the doctor, with
a sneer, "and so my feelings may surprise you,
25 Master Silver. But if I were sure they were
raving-as I am morally certain one, at least,
of them is down with fever-I should leave this
camp, and, at whatever risk to my own carcass,
take them the assistance of my skill."
30 "Ask your pardon, sir, you would be very
AND Last 341
wrong," quoth Silver. "You would lose your
precious life, and you may lay to that. I'm on
your side now, hand and glove; and I shouldn't
wish for to see the party weakened, let alone
yourself, seeing as I know what I owes you.
But these men down there, they couldn't keep
their word-no, not supposing they wished to;
and what's more, they couldn't believe as you
could."
"No," said the doctor. ""You're the man to
keep your word, we know that."
Well, that was about the last news we had of
the three pirates. Only once we heard a gunshot
a great way off, and supposed them to be hunt-
ing. A council was held, and it was decided
that we must desert them on the island-to the
huge glee, I must say, of Ben Gunn, and with
the strong approval of Gray. We left a good
stock of powder and shot, the bulk of the salt
goat, a few medicines, and some other neces-
saries, tools, clothing, a spare sail, a fathom or
two of rope, and, by the particular desire of the
doctor, a handsome present of tobacco.
That was about our last doing on the island.
Before that, we had got the treasure stowed,
and had shipped enough water and the re-
mainder of the goat meat, in case of any dis-
tress; and at last, one fine morning, we weighed
anchor, which was about all that we could
manage, and stocd out of North Inlet, the same
is) So
a
1 i)
342 TREASURE ISLAND
colours flying that the captain had flown and
fought under at the palisade.
The three fellows must have been watching
us closer than we thought for, as we soon had
proved. For, coming through the narrows, we
had to lie very near the southern point, and
there we saw all three of them kneeling together
on a spit of sand, with their arms raised in
supplication. It went to all our hearts, I think,
to leave them in that wretched state; but we
could not risk another mutiny; and to take
them home for the gibbet would have been a
cruel sort of kindness. The doctor hailed them
and told them of the stores we had left, and
where they were to find them. But they con-
tinued to call us by name, and appeal to us,
for God's sake, to be merciful, and not leave
them to die in such a place.
At last, seeing the ship still bore on. her
course, and was now swiftly drawing out of
earshot, one of them-I know not which it was
-leapt to his feet with a hoarse cry, whipped
his musket to his shoulder, and sent a shot
whistling over Silver's head and through the
mainsail.
After that, we kept under cover of the bul-
warks, and when next I looked out they had
disappeared from the spit, and the spit itself
had almost melted out of sight in the growing
AND LAST 343
distance. That was, at least, the end of that;
'and before noon, to my inexpressible joy, the
highest rock of Treasure Island had sunk into
the blue round of sea.
We were so short of men that everyone on
board had to bear a hand-only the captain
lying on a mattress in the stern and giving' his
orders; for, though greatly recovered, he was
still in want of quiet. We laid her head for the
nearest port in Spanish America, for we could
not risk the voyage home without fresh hands;
and as it was, what with baffling winds and a
couple of fresh gales, we were all worn out
before we reached it.
It was just at sundown when we cast anchor
in a most beautiful land-locked gulf, and were
immediately surrounded by shore boats full of
negroes, and Mexican Indians, and half-bloods,
selling fruits and vegetables, and offering to
dive for bits of money. The sight of so many
good-humoured faces (especially the blacks),
the taste of the tropical fruits, and above all,
the lights that began to shine in the town, made
a most charming contrast to our dark and
bloody sojourn on the island; and the doctor
and the squire, taking me along with them,
went ashore to pass the early part of the night.
Here they met the captain of an English man-
of-war, fell in talk with him, went on board his
Hm 0
bo 5
oO
oO
ot
344 TREASURE ISLAND
ship, and, in short, had so agreeable a time,
that day was breaking when we came alongside
the Hispaniola.
Ben Gunn was on deck alone, and, as soon
as we came on board, he began, with wonderful
contortions, to make us a confession. Silver was
gone. The maroon had connived® at his escape
in a shore boat some hours ago, and he now
assured us he had only done so to preserve our
lives, which would certainly have been forfeit
if "that man with the one leg had stayed
aboard." But this was not all. The sea-cook had
not gone empty handed. He had cut through a
bulkhead unobserved, and had removed one of
the sacks of coin, worth, perhaps, three or four
hundred guineas, to help him on his further
wanderings.
I think we were all pleased to be so cheaply
quit of him.
Well, to make a long story short, we got a
few hands on board, made a good cruise home,
and the Hispaniola reached Bristol just as Mr.
Blandly was beginning to think of fitting out
her consort. Five men only of those who had
sailed returned with her. "Drink and the devil
had done for the rest," with a vengeance;
although, to be sure, we were not quite in so
bad a case as that other ship they sang about: -
AND LAST 345
"With one man of her crew alive,
What put to sea with seventy-five."
All of us had an ample share of the treasure,
and used it wisely or foolishly, according to our
natures. Captain Smollett is now retired from
the sea. Gray not only saved his money, but,
being suddenly smit with the desire to rise,
also studied his profession; and he is now mate
and part owner of a fine full-rigged ship; mar-
ried besides, and the father of a family. As for
Ben Gunn, he got a thousand pounds, which he
spent or lost in three weeks, or, to be more
exact, in nineteen days, for he was back beg-
ging on the twentieth. Then he was given a
lodge to keep, exactly as he had feared upon
the island; and he still lives, a great favourite,
though something of a butt, with the country
boys, and a notable singer in church on Sun-
days and saints' days.
Of Silver we have heard no more. That for-
midable seafaring man with one leg has at last
gone clean out of my life; but I daresay he met
his old negress, and perhaps still lives in com-
fort with her and Captain Flint. It is to be
hoped so, I suppose, for his chances of comfort
in another world are very small.
The bar silver and the arms still lie, for all
that I know, where Flint buried them; and cer-
| 346 TREASURE ISLAND
tainly they shall lie there for me. Oxen and
wain®-ropes would not bring me back again to
that accursed island; and the worst dreams that
ever I have are when I hear the surf booming
5 about its coasts, or start upright in bed, with
the sharp voice of Captain Flint still ringing
in my ears: "Pieces of eight! pieces of eight!"
NOTES
To THE HeEsiTaTING PURCHASER
Pace 2, line 3. maroons. Originally the fugitive slaves
of Jamaica and Dutch Guiana, who made war on the
white settlers. Here persons put ashore and abandoned on
a desolate coast: a custom practised by pirates. ;
1. 4. Buccaneer, or Bucaneer: A curer of meat (from
boucaner, smoke meat, from boucan, a place for smoking
meat) ; a name first applied in the early part of the seven-
teenth century to the French settlers of Hispaniola (San
Domingo) and of the neighboring island, Tortuga del Mer,
who hunted the flesh of wild animals for purposes of trade.
Self-interest and Spanish opposition soon united these ad-
venturers-who later represented all nations save Spain-
into a compact confederation; and, as it was but an easy
step from smuggling to piracy, these freebooters for more
than half a century, either under the high-sounding name
of privateer or as plain pirate, laid the entire commerce of
the Spanish Main by the heels. Yet, despite their cupidity
and foulness, and the human blood that everywhere fcllowed
in their wake, such examples of reckless daring and physical
courage, such hairbreath escapes and visions of fabulous
wealth are called to mind at the mention of such names
as England, Roberts, Davis, Kidd, Morgan, Blackbeard, and
others, that few words in the language have a larger
romantic connotation than does this word Buccaneer. And
while the characters in this tale, in keeping with this con-
notation, are broadly typical and are not at all historical,
_ nevertheless there is much in the suggested characteriza-
tion of Flint which reminds us of what tradition has
fastened to the career of Edward Teach, the Blackbeard,
who also had a subordinate by the name of Hands. Cf.
Harper's Monthly, vol. LXXV, 357, 502.
1. 12. Ballantyne: Robert Michael Ballantyne. Born
1825; died 1894. A writer of novels for boys. A typical
work is The Dog Crusoe, a tale of the Far West.
1, 13. Cooper: James Fenimore Cooper. Born 1789;
died 1851. Stevenson refers to Cooper's tales of the sea
and also to his famous Leatherstocking tales.
Pace 5, 1. 8. in the year of grace 17-. See "A Gossip
on Romance" (Memories and Portraits, p. 248) for the way
in which Stevenson as a boy liked a story to begin. Do you
share the same feeling?
], 15. a tall, strong, heavy, nut-brown man, etc. Do
these few details readily help you make a picture of the
man? Which detail is the most vivid? Note a similar effect
in the following descriptions.
Pace 6, 1. 4.
Fifteen men on the dead man's chest-
Yo-ho-ho, and a bottle of rum!
The first two lines of a song of West Indian piracy, which
originated in the wreck of an English buccaneer on the cay
called "The Dead Man's Chest" (from which it is said only
a quantity of rum and fifteen men were saved). For the
complete song, which follows, I am indebted to Mr. Jeffery
Montague of The Richmond Times, who has pieced from
various fragments this song together.
BILLY BONES'S FANCY
(To the tune of '"'Blow the Man Down.'')
"Fifteen men on a dead man's chest;
Yo-ea' (heave)-ho, and a bottle o'? rum!
Drink and the devil had done for the rest;
Yo-'ea'-ho, and a bottle o' rum!
"They drank and they drank and they got so drunk,
Yo-'ea'-ho, and a bottle o' rum!
Each from the dead man bit a chunk;
Yo-'ea'-ho, and a bottle o' rum!
"They sucked his blood and they crunched his bones;
Yo-'ea'-ho, and a bottle o' rum!
When suddenly up came Davy Jones;
Yo-'ea'-ho, and a bottle o' rum!
"And Davy Jones had a big black key;
Yo-'ea'-ho, and a bottle o' rum!
The key to his locker beneath the sea;
Yo-'ea'-ho, and a bottle o' rum!
"He winked and he blinked like an owl in a tree;
Yo-'ea'-ho, and a bottle o' rum!
And grinned with a horrible kind o' glee;
Yo-'ea'-ho, and a bottle o' rum!
*"""My men,' says he, 'you must come wi' me-'
Yo-'ea'-ho, and a bottle o' rum!
'Must come wi' me to the depths o' the sea;'
Yo-'ea'-ho, and a bottle o' rum!
"So he clapped them into his locker in the sea,
Yo-'ea'-ho, and a bottle o' rum!
And he locked them in with his big black key;
Yo-'ea'-ho, and a bottle o' rum!
Note the recurrence of the fragment of this song, and its
significance in the development of the tale. Compare Scott's
use of this element of romantic invention in The Pirate
and in Guy Mannering; see also Stevenson's appreciation
of the same in "A Gossip on Romance."
l. 7. capstan bars. The capstan used on shipboard was
a large revolving cylinder used to exert power on a cable
in raising the anchor and the like. The seamen turned the
capstan by means of bars fitted into sockets. In their songs
or chanties the boatswain sang the alternate lines, while
the crew bawled out the refrain as they heaved in unison
on the capstan bars. See page 348.
l. rz. connoisseur: one possessing fine critical judgment
or taste.
Pace 7, |. 4. before the mast. Common sailors lived in
the forecastle, or front position of the ship.
1, 5. skipper: captain.
1. 6. the mail: the stage coach which carried mail.
Pace 8, 1. 1. Bristol. At the time of the story the city of
Bristol was the second seaport in England. Naturally, it
350 _ NortTEs
was crowded with seafaring men and intimately acquainted
with piracy because of the depredations committed on its
shipping.
]. 24. diabolical: fiendish.
Pacer to, |. 1. Dry Tortugas: a group of coral keys in
the Gulf of Mexico off the extreme southern coast of
Florida.
l. 2. Spanish Main: a name vaguely applied to the
northern coast of South America; popularly used to desig-
nate the Caribbean Sea.
1, 20. terrible at sea. Compare Billy Bones and his con-
duct with Irving's account of the buccaneer and his be-
havior in Wolfert Webber. Stevenson saw this account after
he had written Treasure Island, and was amazed at the
similarity.
Pace 11, l. 5. hawker: peddler.
PacE 13, 1. 19. assizes: sessicns of court.
Pace 15, |. 18. cutlass: a heavy, curved sword, much
used by sailors.
PacE 20, l. 12. swinging: hanging, the customary pun-
ishment for those. convicted of piracy.
1. 23. chine: backbone.
Pace 25, 1. 12. noggin: a Scotch word meaning a sifiall
cup or mug.
1. 19. Yellow Jack: yellow fever, a terrible disease of
the tropics.
Pace 26, 1. 5. fidge: Scotch for fidget.
Pace 27, 1. 2. lubber: a dolt, a clumsy fellow: one de-
ficient in seamanship.
Pace 28, 1. 5. lay 'em aboard: encounter them.
Pace 30, |. 29. "Will any kind friend inform a poor
blind man... ?" Cf. David Balfour's encounter with
the blind beggar in Kidnapped. This type of villain seems
the survival of a frightened childish fancy. Has any of this
fear been translated into these pages? See also Dickens'
treatment of the blind man in Barnaby Rudge.
Pace 37, l. 18. croaking of the inmates of the wood.
Doubtless crows, settling on their rocsts for the night.
Pace 38, 1. 7. lugger: a small vessel, ordinarily used for
fishing.
Pace 40, |. 19. gully: a sheath-knife.
Pace 41, |. 14. miscellany: a mixture of things.
I. 15-16. quadrant: an instrument for taking observa-
tions at sea. canikin: a small can or drinking vessel. brace:
pair.
PaGE 42, ll. 12-14. doubloons: Spanish gold coins worth
about $16.00 in modern money. louis-d'ors: French coins,
first struck in the reign of Louis XIII, worth about $4.00.
guineas. English coins of the value of about $5.00. pieces
of eight: Spanish dollars.
Pace 46, |. 28. Flint's fist: Flint's handwriting.
Pace 47, |. 12. glim: candle.
Pace 49, 1. 1. Georges: English coins.
l. 10. miscreant: wretch.
Pacer 51, |. 10. dingle: ravine or narrow dell.
PacE 55, l. 29. poll: head.
Pace 57, l. 6. Blackbeard: Edward' Teach, one of the
most daring and bloodthirsty pirates of the Spanish Main.
l. 10. Trinidad: an island off the northeast coast of
Venezuela, discovered by Columbus, and taken from the
Spanish by the British in 1797. Port of Spain, its capital,
was the scene of one of Blackbeard's most daring exploits.
Pace s9, |. 11. Offe Caraccas. Caracas, the capital of
Venezuela.
Pace 60, 1, 5. bearings: directions according to the
compass.
Pace 61, l. 9. cache: place of concealment, usually a
hole in the ground.
Pace 62, l. 2. duck and drake: a game played by skip-
ping stones on water.
PacE 66, |. 27. pretty rum go: a very strange state of
affairs.
Pace 67, 1. 8. calumnies: slanders.
Pace 68, 1. 16. old tarpaulinst veteran seamen, old
tars.
]. 19. come post: in the quickest possible way.
]. 26. consort: companion ship.
PacE 71, l. 17. quays: solid landing places built along
the shore; wharves. Ordinarily pronounced keys.
352 NotTEs
l. 26. figureheads: carved figures on the prows of
ships.
Pace 75, 1. 1. quite loud. You will remember this fact
later.
Pacer 76, 1. 18. dead-eye: a sheaveless block used in rig-
ging a ship.
1, 24. keel-hauling: a mode of punishing a person by
hauling him under a ship's bottom from side to side.
Pace 79, |. 3. davy: affidavit.
1. 4. stand by to go about: let's change the subject.
Pace 87, 1. 17. companion: the hood or covering at the
top of a companion-way, a set of steps leading below from
the deck.
Pace 88, 1. 20. swivel: a gun that may be turned about
on a swivel.
Pace ot, |. 6. the ships mystery. Perhaps we may get
a clue to this mystery before long; watch for it.
Pace 92, |. 8. lanyard: a loop of cord, passing over one
shoulder.
1, 11. bulkhead: a partition.
Pace 93, 1. 24. England: Captain Ned England, a
pirate who operated in West Indian waters.
l. 25. Madagascar: an island off the east coast of Africa,
a famous haunt of the pirates of the Indian Ocean.
1, 26. Malabar: a district on the west coast of India.
1, 26. Surinam: in Dutch Guiana, South America.
]. 27. Providence: Olid Providence, an island off the
eastern coast of Nicaragua, the scene of Morgan's first
exploit.
1, 27. Porto Bello: in Panama on the Caribbean Sea,
sacked in 1688 by Captain Henry Morgan, whose accum-
ulated prizes have been estimated at the enormous figure
Pacr 94, 1. 2. Goa: The capital of the Portuguese
possessions in India.
PacE 95, 1. 17. duff: plum-pudding, a great treat to
sailors, whose ordinary diet contained little fruit or sweets.
1, 20. broached: opened.
l. 20. waist: the middle part of the ship.
Pace 96, 1. 1. trades: the trade-winds, which »vlow
westerly between latitudes 30° north and 30° south.
Pace 98, 1. 3. broadside: the simultaneous discharge of
all the guns at one side of a vessel.
1. 8. Roberts: Captain Bartholomew Roberts, who fell
in action against a man-of-war.
1. 21. Davis: Captain Howel Davis, a pirate of unrivalled
audacity, who met death by the treachery of one of his
own crew. Roberts was his successor in command.
Pace 104, Il. 1. Execution Dock: the place at London
Docks where pirates were hanged in chains.
PacE 106, |. 16. hold your luff: hold to your course;
stick to your purpose.
Pace 109, 1. 4. Capt. Kidd's Anchorage. Captain
William Kidd, an American pirate whose. notoriety seems
to have been much greater than his exploits. He was hanged
at Execution Dock in 1701. See The Book of Buried
Treasure, by Ralph D. Paine (The Macmillan Company,
1926) and Irving's "Kidd the Pirate," in Tales of a Traveller.
l, ro. careen: to cause a vessel to lean over in order to
clean the hull.
Pace 112, |. 5. a sign he was agitated. Compare page
PacE 117, |. 21. scuppers: openings at the side of a ship
to allow water to run from the deck.
Pace 118, 1. 25. the ship warped. To warp a ship is to
move it from one berth to another by hauling on a rope,
which is usually made fast to some object ashore.
Pace 119, |. 11. conned the ship: directed the steering.
]. 13. chains: large links holding the dead-eyes at the
bow of a ship. Here a seaman stood in the chains and
measured the depth of the water as the ship moved.
Pace 124, 1. 15. gigs: light boats, often fitted with
sails.
Pace 125, |. 6. disaffected: disloyal, discontented.
Pace 138, 1. 13. nondescript: a thing not easily de-
scribed.
Pace 140, I. 13. incongruous: not in harmony.
l. 15. gaskin: shreds of the oakum used for calking the
seams of a ship.
1. 17. accoutrement: equipment.
Pacer 141, l. 7. stone: fourteen pounds.
Pace 142, |. 2. chuck-farthen: chuck-farthing, a game
played by pitching small coins.
Pace 143, 1. 21. clove hitch: tight place.
Pace 144, 1. 1. livery: uniform of a servant.
1, 24. cutwater: ordinarily the sharp prow of a ship.
Does it mean a man's nose here?
Pace 152, 1. 2. "Lillibullero": the name of a political
ballad of satirical vein, written by Lord Wharton about
1686. It was popular among all classes in England, and,
its music being a quickstep or march, especially so in
the army.
1. 5. jolly-boat: one of the smaller of a ship's boats.
Pace 155, 1. 22. Duke of Cumberland: William Au-
gustus, youngest son of George II, in command at the
battle of Fontenoy in 1745.
Pace 158, |. 20. painter: a rope fastened to the bow
of a boat. '
PacE 159, 1. 7. counter: the part of a ship's stern be-
tween the water line and the extreme overhang of the
body.
Pace 161, 1. 3. gallipot: a small earthen vessel.
PacE 165, 1. 25. reparation: amends.
Pace 166, 1. 28. bandoleer: a broad belt slung over
the shoulder.
PacE 170, l. 6, acquiescence: agreement.
Pacr 173, 1. rz. ricochet (rik'-0-sha'): a glancing re-
bound.
Pace 176, 1..3. fly: clever, shrewd.
l, 24. noon observation to about six bells: from
T2 vows eee Ms
Pace 186, 1. 5. cavalier: disdainful; after the manner
of a cavalier.
PacE 193, |. 7. to Davy Jones: to destruction. To
sailors Davy Jones is the evil spirit of the deep, and those
who are lost at sea are said to have gone to Davy Jones's
locker.
Pace 197, 1. 27. doldrums: ccean calms, or the parts uf
the ocean where these calms occur.
Pace 203, I. 28. hanger: cutlass.
PacE 212, |. 18. to take French leave: to go without
leave-taking or consent.
PacE 216, ]. 1. coracle: a primitive boat made by
covering a wicker frame with skins. Several dictionaries
have illustrations.
Pace 235, |. 7. jib-boom: a spar projecting out from
the prow of a ship.
Pacer 241, 1. 15. bilge: foul water that collects in the
hull of a ship.
Pace 248, |. 13. I've missed stays. To miss stays is to
miss in going about from one tack to another; to fail in
one's undertaking; to be undone.
PaGE 249, |. 22. subaltern: lieutenant, subordinate.
Pace 250, 1. 2. estuary: the place where a river widens
to join the ocean.
l. 14. catspaw: a light, fitful wind that ruffles the water
in patches.
Pace 261, |. 6. doused: struck, lowered violently.
PAGE 272, 1) x1. link: torch.
Pace 274, |. 22. truculently: savagely.
1. 25. dog-watch: the period between 4 and 6 P.M, or
that between 6 and 8 P.M.
Pace 275, |. 8. keelson: the part of a ship just above
the keel.
PacE 277, |. 28. to the yard-arm: hanged.
Pace 279, 1. 30. valley: value.
PaGE 280, 1. 1. marlinspike: a small, pointed iron tool
used in sail-making and rope-splicing.
PaGE 280, |. 26. blunt: money.
Pace 2092, |. 26. to kiss the book on: to use in taking
a solemn oath.
PacE 294, |. 11. environed: surrounded.
Pace 296, |. 14. supercargo: an officer on a merchant
ship.
Pace 299, |. 15. slip your cable: run away.
Pacer 300, |. 6. preponderance: superiority.
1. 14. gammon: hoodwink, talk nonsense to.
1. 19. volubility: Glibness of tongue.
PacE 302, 1. 30. holus bolus: the whole of it.
356 NotTEs
Pace 306. Flint's pointer. Compare this treasure hunt
with the one in Poe's "The Gold-Bug."
Pace 311, |. 23. marish: marsh (Scottish).
Pace 314, 1. 20.*doit: a Dutch coin worth about one-
fourth of a cent.
PacE 326, l. 25. probation: proof.
PaGE 331, l. 15. teetotum: a kind of top.
PacE 336, 1. 9. dereliction: neglect, failure.
Pace 337, l. 18. obsequious: humbly attentive.
PAGE 339, 1. 4. moidores: Portuguese coins, worth about
$6 each.
1. 4. sequins: Italian coins, valued at about $2.25 a
piece.
PacE 340, |. 9. ingratiate: to win one's way into favor.
Pace 344, Il. 7. connived at his escape: pretended not
to notice it.
PacE 346, 1. 2. wain: wagon or cart.
SUGGESTED SuBJECTS FOR Discussion oR COMPOSITION
1. The chapter in Treasure Island that I like best and
my reasons.
2. Make a comparison between Jim Hawkins and Dick
Johnson.
3. Jim's influence upon the course of the story.
4. The passage of description that I like best and my
reasons.
5. The development of Squire Trelawney's opinion of
Captain Smollett.
6. Resolved, that Captain Smollett is (or is not) a more
admirable character than Dr. Livesey.
7. Analyze the reasons for the defeat and failure of the
mutineers.
8. What uses have the snatches of song in this tale?
Can you compare their effect with the effect produced by
songs in other books you have read?
9g. Compare Billy Bones with the buccaneer in Irving's
"Wolfert Webber" (Tales of a Traveller).
1o. Compare the treasure hunt with that related in Poe's
"The Gold Bug."
Swe 74!
BSCS Nah tase SHAR ay AA xe BAUS etna
ath Ws
